

Bibiana Obler

Arp, Hans/Jean (18861966)

Hans/Jean Arp, an Alsatian poet and artist, was a founding member of Dada
and an active participant in Constructivism and Surrealism. Arp grew up in
Strasbourg speaking German, French, and Alsatian. He studied fine arts in
Strasbourg, Weimar, and Paris, and even early in his career was active in
international artistic and literary circles. In 1910, he co-founded the
Moderne Bund and contributed to the Blue Rider Almanac. A German citizen,
Arp successfully dodged the draft during World War I, finding refuge first
in Paris and then in Zurich. At an exhibition that featured his
embroideries, tapestries, and works on paper at the Tanner Gallery, he met
Sophie Taeuber, who soon became a friend and collaborator and, in October
1922, his wife. Early in their friendship her exploration of strict
geometries led to a series of collaborative vertical-horizontal
compositions in collage and embroidery that are among the earliest purely
abstract works produced by European avant-gardes. In 1916, Arp joined Hugo
Ball, Tristan Tzara, and others in launching Dada. Informed by mysticism
and Eastern philosophies, Arp sought to transcend the boundedness of
individual production by working with chance, thus deliberately
relinquishing some control over the process of making. Inspired by the
natural environs of Lake Maggiore, Ascona, he explored biomorphic forms in
ink, wood, and embroidery. Arp developed this organic vocabulary throughout
his career. Beginning in the 1930s, he focused increasingly on sculpture in
durable materials such as marble and bronze.

Arp, an active member of Dada in Zurich, Berlin, Cologne, and Paris,
participated in performances, designed costumes and sets, exhibited artwork
including collages and wood reliefs, and contributed woodcuts and poetry to
Dadaist journals. He traveled extensively in the early 1920s before
settling in Clamart, near Paris, around 1928. He had become a French
citizen in 1926, thanks to his Alsatian origins. He developed an object
language, a personally and spiritually charged iconography of elements
such as the navel, moustache, egg, and necktie, which he deployed in
unexpected juxtapositions in his visual and written art. Moving fluidly
between abstraction and figuration, he avoided becoming embroiled in the
fractious politics of the 1920s art world and frequented Surrealist
meetings while remaining a Dadaist and champion of concrete art (Cercle et
Carr, Abstraction-Cration). Dedicated to collaboration throughout his
career, Arp worked closely on artistic projects with a wide variety of
colleagues  including Theo van Doesburg, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst,
Vicente Hidobro, Kurt Schwitters, and Taeuber  in the 1920s and 1930s. In
1930, Arp turned increasingly to sculpture in the round, such as his
organic but otherworldly Human Concretions, made of durable materials such
as wood, stone, bronze, clay, and plaster.

At age 50, in response to National Socialism, Arp stopped writing his
poetry in German and started writing in French. Only in 1939 did he start
going by Jean rather than Hans. He escaped Paris with Taeuber before the
Germans arrived in 1939, seeking refuge first in the south of France, then
returning to Switzerland in 1942, where Taeuber died in January 1943.
Devastated, Arp stopped making sculpture for five years and dedicated many
reliefs and poems to Taeuber's memory. In the late 1940s, Arp resumed his
busy production and exhibition schedule, remaining artistically active
until his death in 1966.



References and further reading

Arp, Hans. Jours ffeuills. Pomes, essais, souvenirs 1920-1965. Paris:
      Gallimard, 1966.

-------------. Unsern Tglichen Traum... Erinnerungen und Dichtungen aus
      den Jahren 19141954. Zurich: Arche, 1955.

Arp, Jean. Arp on Arp: Poems, Essays, Memories. Joachim Neugroschel, trans.
      New York: Viking, 1972.

------------. On My Way: Poetry and Essays 1912-1947. New York: Wittenborn,
      Schultz, 1948.

Arp, Hans and El Lissitzky, eds. Die Kunstismen/Les isme de l'art/ The Isms
      of Art. Erlenbach-Zrich: Eugen Rentsch, 1925.

Hancock, Jane and Stefanie Poley. Arp. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press, 1987.

Obler, Bibiana. Intimate Collaborations: Kandinsky and Mnter, Arp and
      Taeuber. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014.

Rau, Bernd. Jean Arp: The Reliefs: Catalogue of Complete Works. New York:
      Rizzoli, 1981.

Read, Herbert. The Art of Jean Arp. New York: Abrams, 1968.

Robertson, Eric. Arp: Painter, Poet, Sculptor. New Haven: Yale University
      Press, 2006.

[pic]

Image: Arp, Concrtion humaine (torse-fruit), 1934, white marble. 32 x 56 x
43 cm. Muse national dart moderne, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. Inv.
AM 896 S 

http://www.photo.rmn.fr/cf/htm/CPicZ.aspx?E=2C6NU0C6KHQS
