
Art Deco

Art Deco was the predominant decorative style in Europe and the United
States between the wWorld wWars, before spreading internationally and
reaching its climax in the mid-1920s. It is known primarily for its
opulence in materials and sense of elegant glamour, luxury, and prosperity
in its design. Art Decos alternating geometric vocabulary and reliance on
stylized natural forms, including flowers, animals, and female figures in
the decorations, were applied to objects in every area of the decorative
arts, including furniture, jewelry, graphics, bookbinding, glassware and
ceramics.

In the United States, its ascendant stepped forms were ideally suited for
the early developments in urban skyscraper architecture. Like the Art
Nouveau, which it replaced in popularity, Art Deco was an all-encompassing
style in which all aspects of an interior and exterior were coordinated in
design. The streamlined curve of Art Deco was seen embraced by industrial
designers, in consumer products including the automobile, and household
products now being made from Bakelite and other new plastics.

Several factors were influentialinfluenced in the development of Art Deco
in Paris in the first decade of the twentieth-century. Founded in 1901, the
Socit des Artistes Dcorateurs worked to promote the most talented
designers in Paris to reinforce the French position at the forefront of
increasingly competitive European markets. This impetus was largely in
response to the exhibits at the Universal Exposition in Paris in 1900,
where the Art Nouveau style was seen as having become too commercialized
and diluted. The Socits efforts to organize an international exposition
were delayed because of World War IOne. When finally realized, the Art Deco
style was seen at its best expression in the pavilions, ensembles, and
objects on view at the Exposition Internationale des Arts Dcoratifs et
Industriels Modernes (International Exhibition of Modern and Industrial
Decorative Arts), held in Paris in 1925, and from which the name was
eventually applied to describe the style on view.

In 1903, leading Parisian artists, architects, and designers, similarly
recognizing the need to exhibit together, founded the Salon dAutomne. The
group was responsible for introducing Parisians to the work of Paul Gauguin
and other leading artists, including Paul Cezanne, Puvis de Chavannes,
Odilon Redon, and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec among others. In 1905, the
Salon dAutomne introduced the work of the Fauves  Henri Matisse and Andre
Derain, whose liberated and abstract use of colour and bold forms
designated them as wild beasts.

At the same time, the formal experiments of Cubism led to an interest in
geometric form and abstraction in many realms of art and design. This is
seen in the exploration of pure colour and non-representational forms in
the works of Robert and Sonia Delaunay, and in shapes and forms that were
soon applied to clothing and objects, including automobiles. The Futurists
also explored dynamic movement, speed, and the machine aesthetic.

The Ballet Russes was one of the most important influences on the
development of visual culture in the 1910s. Brought to Paris in 1909, the
performances by Serge Diaghilevs company and his talented collaborators,
including the designer Leon Bakst, astonished audiences and inspired
designers with their enveloping and intoxicating mixture of ornament,
pattern, and colour in spectacles evoking exotic or far-away realms in the
dancing, sets, costumes, and staging.

Meanwhile, the appeal of the exotic was further fueled by Frances vast
colonial territories, inspiring the use of primitive or tribal forms from
Africa; an interest in new techniques and aestheticized surface qualities
from lacquer and ceramic glazing from Asia; and the use of rare and exotic
woods and other materials, often from the colonies, such as sharkskin,
tortoiseshell, ivory, and semi-precious stones for inlays. The Art Deco
synthesis of elements, fusing geometric and exotic forms, luxurious
materials, and heightened aestheticism, also incorporated varied forms that
reflected popular interests at the time. Zigzags, stepped pyramidal forms,
and sunbursts were inspired by the Near Eastern and Aztec examples, and the
interest generated by the recent discoveries in Egypt, in the 1920s,
including King Tutankhamuns tomb. Art Deco designers mined the French
styles from the past for traditional elements that contributed a sense of
Classical restraint with elegant proportions and stylized natural motifs of
floral garlands and cornucopias. Travel, adventure, and the contemporary
interest in exotic places were themes applied to graphics and advertising
using streamlined or sophisticated Art Deco forms.

French Art Deco in particular is characterized by the exquisite
craftsmanship of the object by designers using the most luxurious wealth of
materials, as seen in the ensembles of milie-Jacques Ruhlmann and the
designers Se et Mare. The collaborations between artists, designers, and
fashion designers led to some of the most innovative and interesting
examples of Art Deco ensembles, such as the tribal theme dcor made by
Eileen Gray, Paul Iribe, and Pierre Legrain for the successful couturier
Jacques Doucet, or the textile designs by the artist Raoul Dufy made for
the designer Paul Poiret. More moderate versions of these atmospheric,
total interiors were soon available from the design studios affiliated with
the leading department stores in Paris.

The popularity of Art Deco waned as interest grew in mass production and
industrial materials, such as tubular steel furniture, which lacked
ornamentation and was suited to the ethos of form following function that
began to influence the direction of modern design from architects such as
Le Corbusier and Walter Gropius. The disregard for cost or practicality in
the materials and luxurious designs of Art Deco eventually led to its
demise, an end that was inescapable with the beginning of the Great
Depression in 1929 and escalating political tensions throughout Europe in
the 1930s.

The most triumphant crowning examples of Art Deco architecture are the
skyscrapers in New York City, including the Chrysler Building, 1928-30,
and the Empire State Building, 1929-31. Geometric, stepped and pyramidal
forms in each evoke the streamlined, machine aesthetic that prevailed.
These serve as a dynamic reminder of the Art Deco, the final design style
of the twentieth-century that was conceived of as a complete and all-
encompassing program uniting architecture, arts, and the applied arts.


References and further reading:

Arwas, Victor. Art Deco. New York: Abrams, 1986.

Battersby, Martin. The Decorative Twenties. London: Herbert, 1988.

Benton, Charlotte, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Wood, eds. Art Deco 19101939.
London: V&A Publications, 2003.

Brunhammer, Yvonne, and Suzanne Tise. The Decorative Arts in France,
19001942: La Socit des Artistes Dcorateurs. New York: Rizzoli, 1990.

Goss, Jared. "French Art Deco". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New
York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000.
http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/frdc/hd_frdc.htm (June 2010)

Hillier, Bevis. Art Deco of the 20s and 30s. London: Studio Vista, 1968.

Lowe, David Garrard. Art Deco New York. New York: Watson-Guptill, 2004.

Troy, Nancy J. Modernism and the Decorative Arts in France. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1991.

