
Gustav Klimt (1862  1918)
Sharon Jordan

Overview
Gustav Klimt had an indelible influence on the artistic and cultural
innovations that occurred in Vienna at the turn of the twentieth century.
He was a founding member and public figurehead for the citys Secession, an
organization responsible for exhibitions that introduced the public to the
latest developments in European modern art. His associations with leading
members of the citys cultural and intellectual elite, and his
collaborations with leading artists, architects, designers, and patrons
resulted in many important artworks that provided the foundation for
modernism.

Early Work
In 1876, at age fourteen, Klimt enrolled at the recently founded
Kunstgewerbeschule (Imperial and Royal School of Applied Arts and Crafts),
where he spent seven years. He quickly established his reputation with
large mural paintings in public buildings as part of the redevelopment of
the Ringstrasse, the circular road around Viennas old city lined with
institutions that were the focus of civic and cultural life. A series on
the history of theatre for the new Burgtheater (Imperial Court Theatre),
1886-88, was followed by murals in the Kunsthistorisches Museum (Art
Museum), 1891, featuring female personifications of the arts of ancient
cultures, showing Klimts growing interest in contemporary women as a
primary subject in his work. Klimt received the Emperors prize for his
realist painting Auditorium Theatre (1888), which includes more than one
hundred realistic portraits of leading Viennese citizens making up the
theatres audience.

[pic]

The painting Schubert at the Piano (1898-99) shows Klimts use of the soft
palette and expressive brushwork associated with Impressionism to evoke the
domestic calm of the composers early-nineteenth century Biedermeier era, a
time similar to the artists own in that music played a vital role in both.
The symbolic work was praised as being uniquely Viennese in its time.

[pic]

The Vienna Secession
In 1897, Klimt and twenty of Viennas leading artists and architects formed
the Secession to pursue a progressive, pan-European program of exhibitions
with Klimt serving as the groups president for its first two years. The
Secession was notable for its exhibition policy that promoted artists based
not on a uniformity of style but on an artists willingness to explore
modern ideas. This was assertively proclaimed with the inscription of the
organizations motto to every age its art, to every art its freedom on
the exterior of the Secessions new headquarters on the Ringstrasse, an
eclectic building designed by Josef Marie Olbrich.

Klimts poster for the first Secession exhibition in 1898 features the
ancient hero Theseus slaying the Minotaur, with Athena, goddess of wisdom,
courage, inspiration, and the arts, providing watchful supervision. The
imagery has been interpreted as the youthful Secession organization ending
the hegemony of traditional institutional policies. The poster can also be
seen as reflecting the Secessions commitment to exhibiting all art forms
equally, with architecture, sculpture, and painting given equal status
alongside the graphic arts and design in their policies. In the poster,
this is conveyed with Athena in sculptural form standing in front of the
mural representation of Theseus with the blank expanse of wall below
indicating the role of architecture as providing the foundation within
which to house all of the arts together as intended by the Secession.

[pic][pic]

These ideas were further reinforced in the Secessions journal Ver Sacrum,
its name meaning sacred spring indicating the groups belief in the
regenerative possibilities of their art and ideas on Viennas conservative
society. The cover of the first issue, published in January 1898,
summarizes this ideology with its imagery of a tree of art bursting forth
from the confines of its container, its roots now seeking their own
unrestricted path freed from any constraints and barriers, with the three
shields across its foliage representing the fields of architecture,
painting, and sculpture that were being liberated by the Secessions
endeavors.

[pic][pic]

Klimts paintings quickly began to reflect his skillful adaption of
Classical subjects with defiantly modern sentiments. The face of Athena
appears resolutely modern with her gaze as assertive and unwavering as her
stance in Pallas Athena (1898). She introduces the embodiment of the naked
truth in her hand, rather than carrying the traditional figure of Nike or
victory that normally accompanies her. This becomes the subject of the
subsequent painting Nuda Veritas (1899). Here, by showing an individualized
contemporary woman rather than an idealized type, further heightened by the
womans abundant naturalistic red hair, holding a mirror up to viewers,
Klimt mounts an incendiary protest against the prevailing hypocrisy of
expected artistic conventions. The inscription, taken from the illustrious
German writer Friedrich Schiller, shows Klimts unwillingness to be
censored, If you cannot please all men by your actions and your art, then
please the few; it is bad to please the many.

University Faculty Murals and the Beethoven Frieze
In 1896, Klimt began a commission for three paintings to adorn the Great
Hall of the University of Vienna. For seven years, these images were at the
center of heated debates regarding artistic freedom among the universitys
faculty, local journalists, artists, and intellectuals, and the negative
response from many of these people helped to form Klimts unequivocally
independent point of view. The theme was to be the triumph of light and
reason over darkness and ignorance, a metaphor for the universitys
purpose. Instead of a scene of Enlightenment rationality, Philosophy (1900)
shows the perpetual instability and chaotic nature of human existence with
the mural immediately criticized for its apparent lack of aesthetic beauty
and narrative clarity.

[pic][pic][pic]

The realistically observed, rather than idealized figures, populating the
second panel Medicine, completed in 1901, also circumvented expectations.
Hygeia, the ancient personification for medicines benefits, appears in the
foreground removed from the writhing mass of humanity that she is powerless
to aid. The biological and physical imperatives of mankind intertwined with
the inescapable presence of mortality and disease, rather than any sense of
divine creation, are represented by the proximity of the pregnant female at
top right positioned next to a skeleton and the nearby figure of death
robed in black.

The third and final panel, Jurisprudence, exhibited in 1903, reflects the
toll that the preceding controversy had taken on the artist. The
embodiments of truth, law, and justice appear as remote and rigid
constructs at the top, powerless to intervene as the Furies, mythical
goddesses of vengeance, unleash punishment and retribution that envelops
the frail old man in the foreground, signifying the irrationality and
cruelty that often governs human behavior and the indifference that
structures many public institutions.

The Beethoven Frieze is one of Klimts most important artworks. It was made
for the Secessions 14th exhibition in 1902 in honor of the composer and is
based on his Ninth Symphony. Covering three walls at 7 feet high and
totaling 34 meters (112 feet) in length, the narrative depicts humanitys
longing and desire for happiness. Unlike the pessimistic atmosphere of the
Faculty Murals, painted during the same period, the mood throughout this
mural is optimistic with the triumphant power of art and creative
expression seen as a means of fostering a union among individuals to
realize the fulfillment of lifes purpose. In the beginning of the friezes
narrative, floating female figures inhabit an ethereal space with their
gazes inviting viewers to visually follow their journey. Nearby, a man and
a woman representing the suffering of humanity kneel before a golden knight
beseeching his help in humanitys cosmic struggle. The golden knight
responds to these pleas bolstered by the two female figures behind him who
are identified in the exhibitions catalogue as representing ambition with
her crown and empathy with her hands clasped, two traits that will be
necessary for the knights success in overcoming all types of obstacles one
faces in lifes journey, including those in the external world as well as
those resulting from inner weakness. These obstacles are next seen blocking
the knights path in the densely populated middle area of the frieze in the
form of the giant monster Typhon, who proved impossible for humans to
defeat in the legends of Greek mythology, surrounded by personifications
representing many of lifes diversionary temptations or vices, including
greed, envy, lust, and gluttony, alongside manifestations of sickness,
madness, and death. The final section illustrates that the golden knight
has successfully delivered mankind beyond these hostile powers to achieve
genuine fulfillment aided by the arts, which appear in the form of a woman
holding a cithara. The frieze culminates in a man and woman embracing
encased within impenetrable and luxurious golden waves. Serenading the
couple are choral singers inspired by The Ode to Joy, the last movement
of Beethovens Ninth Symphony, with the grouping indicating that happiness
for mankind is found through unity and creative expression.

[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
[pic]

Portraits of Society Women and Landscape Paintings
In the highly stratified society of Vienna, many of the wealthiest Jewish
individuals, lacking political power, exercised their influence through
artistic and cultural patronage. Many acquired Klimts paintings as an
indication of their social prominence and liberal beliefs. Their various
portraits highlight the diversity of sources and decorative motifs that
Klimt freely incorporated into his artworks, giving each figure an alluring
individuality, from Byzantine, Egyptian, Baroque, and Japanese elements to
his incorporation of geometric Jugendstil forms favored by his
contemporaries, in portraits including those of Adele Bloch-Bauer (1907),
whose realistic face and hands appear enshrined amidst an undulating and
intoxicating mass of gold patterning; and Friederike Maria Beer (1916), who
displays her modern taste by wearing an exotic outfit by Klimts associates
in the design firm Weiner Werksttte. Klimt has positioned her in front of
an imaginary backdrop composed of elements drawn from his extensive
personal collection of Japanese woodblock prints and porcelain decorative
objects.

[pic][pic][pic]

One of the most enigmatic relationships chronicled in paintings is between
Klimt and the fashion designer Emilie Flge, a woman of unusual
independence for the time. The pair knew each other for twenty-seven years
and though they never married, they were extremely close, as seen in the
iconic The Kiss (1907-08), perhaps Klimts most famous painting. It is
thought to depict the artist with Emilie and is based on his earlier motif
of the embracing couple seen in the Beethoven Frieze.

The numerous landscape paintings done while spending summers with Emilie
and her family at the lakes surrounding Vienna were readily acquired by
patrons for their idyllic tranquility. The kaleidoscopic colors, expressive
line, and inviting brushwork show Klimts ongoing interest in Post-
Impressionism.

Late Work
The final period of Klimts life shows his continuing interest in the
archetypal subjects of life and death punctuated by love and desire in
works including The Virgin (1913) and The Bride, unfinished at his death in
1918. The linear, architectural construction and the rich colors of these
works show the influence of Klimts young protg Egon Schiele, who along
with Oskar Kokoschk, were introduced to the Viennese public through Klimts
ongoing commitment to their work.

[pic][pic]

Legacy
Though Klimt is well known for his golden decorative paintings, his work
is complex and multi-layered in meaning and appearance. He was a skilled
and versatile draftsman whose evocative sketches show the direct
inspiration he found in women. His paintings present timely
reinterpretations of Classical or archetypal subjects merged with the
formal innovations, spatial abstractions, and decorative patterning that
characterized turn-of-the-century modernism. Klimts work is as unique as
his position for he bridges academic realism and narrative subjects
dominant in much of the nineteenth century with a preference for
abstraction that defined the beginning of the twentieth century. His
influence continues to be felt among contemporary artists for his
commitment to truth and individuality, while the legacy of his work remains
closely related to issues of restitution resulting from the events of the
Second World War. This is the subject of the 2015 film Woman in Gold, that
tells the story of Klimts golden portrait painting of Adele Bloch-Bauer, a
prominent Jewish woman whose familys assets were seized by the Nazis and
the subsequent legal campaign waged by the subjects niece that resulted in
the paintings eventual return to her descendants.

Timeline:

1862 Gustav Klimt is born on the outskirts of Vienna, July 14, 1862.

1876 accepted at the Kunstgewerbeschule School of Applied Arts, Vienna,
founded in 1867

1878-79 founds Knstler-Compagnie with fellow artists Franz Matsch and
brother Ernst to receive commissions for large-scale paintings in public
buildings

1888 Knstler-Compagnie receives Golden Order of Merit for the Burgtheater
paintings

1891 Klimts brother Ernst marries Helene Flge; Klimt paints the first
portrait of seventeen year old Emilie Flge
Klimt joins the Knstlerhausgenossenschaft (Vienna Artists Association),
an organization from which he will resign in 1897 to found the Secession

1897 Klimt is instrumental in founding the Vienna Secession; serves as its
first president
Spends first of many summers with the Flge family; begins painting
landscapes

1898 first and second Secession exhibitions

1900 Philosophy is exhibited at the Seventh Secession exhibition

1901 Medicine is exhibited at the Tenth Secession exhibition

1902 The Beethoven Frieze is exhibited at the Fourteenth Secession

1903 Secession members Josef Hoffmann and Koloman Moser found the Wiener
Werksttte
Medicine is exhibited in a Secession exhibition devoted to Klimt, featuring
over 80 works
Klimt visits Ravenna, Italy; the mosaics in the Church of San Vitale have a
great influence on his forthcoming portrait work

1904 Klimt agrees to produce a marble frieze for the Wiener Werkstttes
gesamtkunstwerk commission for the design and decoration of the Palais
Stoclet villa in Brussels, not completed until 1911

1908 Klimt and his closest associates form the Kunstchau (Art Show), ending
their contributions to the Secession with this alternate exhibition society

1910s Klimts work is widely exhibited throughout Europe

1918 Klimt suffers a stroke in January; dies from complications in February



Further Reading:

Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-Sicle Vienna: Politics and Culture. New York:
Vintage Books, Random House, 1981.

Peter Vergo, Art in Vienna, 1898-1918. London: Phaidon Press, 2007.

Vienna Secession 1898-1998: The Century of Artistic Freedom. Munich and New
York: Prestel Verlag, 1998.

Stefan Zweig, The World of Yesterday. London: Pushkin Press, 2009.

Gustav Klimt catalogue raisonn. Alfred Weidinger, ed. New York: Prestel
Verlag, 2007.

Gustav Klimt die Zeichnungen, 4 vol. catalogue raisonn. Alice Strobl, ed.
Salzburg: Galerie Welz and Albertina, Vienna, 1989.

Gustav Klimt: From Drawing to Painting. Christian M. Nebehay. London:
Thames & Hudson, 2007.

Gustav Klimt: Landscapes. Munich and New York: Prestal Verlag, 2007.

Gustav Klimt: Modernism in the Making. Exh. cat. New York: Harry N. Abrams,
Inc. in association with the National Gallery of Canada, 2001.

Gustav Klimt: Painting, Design and Modern Life. Exh. cat. Tobias G. Natter
and Christoph Grunenberg, eds. London: Tate Publishing, 2008.

Gustav Klimt and Emilie Flge: Photographs. Agnes Husslein-Arco and Alfred
Weidinger, eds. Prestel, 2012.

Gustav Klimt: The Ronald S. Lauder and Serge Sabarsky Collection. Exh. cat.
Renee Price, ed. New York: Neue Galerie, 2007.

Klimts Women. Exh. cat. Tobias Natter and Gerbert Frodl, eds. Vienna and
Cologne: sterreichische Galerie Belvedere and DuMont Verlag, 2000.

The Naked Truth: Klimt, Schiele, Kokoschka and Other Viennese Scandals.
Tobias Natter, ed. Munich and New York: Prestal Verlag, 2005.

Lynn H. Nicholas, The Rape of Europa: The Fate of Europes Treasures in the
Third Reich and the Second World War. New York: Knopf, 1994.

Woman in Gold (2015), film released by BBC Films (UK) and The Weinstein
Company (USA), starring Helen Mirren and Ryan Reynolds.



