

The Austrian painter, graphic artist, writer, and playwright Oskar Kokoschka received distinction as a protégé while still studying at the Viennese School of Applied Arts. He worked for the Wiener Werkstätten (Vienna Workshops) on a freelance basis, creating decorative objects in the Jugendstil for the Cabaret Fledermaus in Vienna, which subsequently also staged his plays, ‘Mörder, Hoffnung der Frauen’ (Murder, Hope of Women) and ‘Sphinx und Strohmann’, (Sphinx and Strawman), both written before the age of twenty-five.  



In 1908, Kokoschka published an illustrated love poem that prefigured later Expressionist poetry, ‘Die träumenden Knaben’ (The Dreaming Boys), which he dedicated to Gustav Klimt. Also in 1908, he participated in an international exhibition held in Vienna, the Kunstschau, where he displayed tapestry designs, illustrations for his drama, ‘Mörder’, the illustrations for ‘Knaben’, a poster entitled Pieta, and an allegorized self-portrait bust, skull-like with open mouth as if screaming, washed in blue, which was purchased by Adolf Loos, who became a trusted friend and fervent admirer of the young artist. Klimt had also supported Kokoschka’s inclusion in the exhibition due to his admiration of the young artist whom he considered to have an outstanding talent. As the older generation of ‘moderns’ had feared, the reaction of the critics and the general public was heated and hostile to Kokoschka, considering his work to be outrageous and barbaric, but it served to make him notorious and well known. Some of his early classroom sketches were bought by Koloman Moser and Emil Orlik.

The Austrian painter, graphic artist, writer, and playwright Oskar Kokoschka received distinction as a protégé while still studying at the Viennese School of Applied Arts. He worked for the Wiener Werkstätten (Vienna Workshops) on a freelance basis, creating decorative objects in the Jugendstil for the Cabaret Fledermaus in Vienna, which subsequently also staged his plays, ‘Mörder, Hoffnung der Frauen’ (Murder, Hope of Women) and ‘Sphinx und Strohmann’, (Sphinx and Strawman), both written before the age of twenty-five.  



In 1908, Kokoschka published an illustrated love poem that prefigured later Expressionist poetry, ‘Die träumenden Knaben ‘ (The Dreaming Boys), which he dedicated to Gustav Klimt. Also in 1908, he participated in an international exhibition held in Vienna, the Kunstschau, where he displayed tapestry designs, illustrations for his drama, ‘Mörder’, the illustrations for ‘Knaben’, a poster entitled Pieta, and an allegorized self-portrait bust, skull-like with open mouth as if screaming, washed in blue, which was purchased by Adolf Loos, who became a trusted friend and fervent admirer of the young artist. Klimt had also supported Kokoschka’s inclusion in the exhibition due to his admiration of the young artist whom he considered to have an outstanding talent. As the older generation of ‘moderns’ had feared, the reaction of the critics and the general public was heated and hostile to Kokoschka, considering his work to be outrageous and barbaric, but it served to make him notorious and well known. Some of his early classroom sketches were bought by Koloman Moser and Emil Orlik.



Kokoschka’s incisive portrait paintings were highly regarded by his artistic peers, not only as stylistically advanced but also as psychologically insightful.  He painted a portrait of Loos, who supported him on two trips to Switzerland in 1909 and 1910, where he produced portraits of Karl Kraus, the Marquise de Rohan-Montesquieu, and Auguste Forel, among others. A self-portrait with Alma Mahler, widow of the composer, of 1913, commemorates their relationship, the severance of which found expression in the most famous of his early works, Die Windsbraut (The Tempest; literally, Bride of the Wind), 1914. A swirling vortex of clouds and wind in which lovers who bear the features of the couple are borne, oblivious to reality, is a representation of ‘inner life’, to the exclusion of the external, of dreams and visions, which were of fundamental interest to Kokoschka throughout his productive years.



Having agreed to a contract with Galerie Paul Cassirer upon his return from Switzerland, Kokoschka was given his first solo exhibit in 1910 and also he began to work with the journal Der Sturm, in which he published a number of his portrait drawings and an illustrated version of ‘Mörder.’  The first monograph on his work was published by Kurt Wolff in 1913.



With the outbreak of World War I, Kokoschka volunteered for the army and was severely wounded. During his recovery in Dresden, he continued exhibiting, publishing portfolios, and painting portraits.  In 1919, he accepted a position as professor at the Dresden Art Academy. Paul Hindemith composed music for his drama, ‘Mörder, Hoffnung der Frauen’, first performed in Frankfurt in 1921, and the artist participated in the Venice Biennale in 1922.



During the next ten years, Kokoschka traveled throughout Europe and North Africa, while his work was shown in London and Paris as well as Germany. When the National Socialists came to power in 1933, he moved to Prague, where he painted the Czech president Tomas Masaryk and met his future wife, Olda. Upon the Czech occupation by the Nazis in 1938, Oskar and Olda Kokoschka escaped to England; he became the president of the Freie Deutsche Kulturbund (Free German Cultural League) there and assumed British citizenship in 1947.



He returned to Austria in 1953 and opened a school in Salzburg (Schule des Sehens/School of Vision) that he directed until 1962, when he moved to Villeneuve in Switzerland, where he spent his final years continuing his creative endeavors.

Further reading:



(Barron)



(Vergo)