

Informel is an art movement characterized by non-geometrical abstraction and expressive gestures. Emerging in the mid-1950s, Informel is generally considered the first radical artistic experiment in postwar Korea, not only because it abandoned representational art in favour of complete abstraction, but also because it initiated a collective rebellion against the government-sponsored National Art Exhibition (gukjeon) system. As the French term suggests, Informel is closely related to its European counterpart and American Abstract Expressionism, which were popular in the 1940s and 1950s.

Informel is an art movement characterized by non-geometrical abstraction and expressive gestures. Emerging in the mid-1950s, Informel is generally considered the first radical artistic experiment in postwar Korea, not only because it abandoned representational art in favour of complete abstraction, but also because it initiated a collective rebellion against the government-sponsored National Art Exhibition (gukjeon) system. As the French term suggests, Informel is closely related to its European counterpart and American Abstract Expressionism, which were popular in the 1940s and 1950s. The Korean Informel found common ground in the young artists’ attempts to come to terms with wartime experiences and their aftershock. The proponents of Informel were determined to explore alternative artistic means, particularly as they regarded conventional academicism as inadequate in representing their sense of despair. The leading artists are Park Seo-bo (1931- ), Kim Tschang-yeul (1929-), Ha In-doo (1930-1989), Ha Jong-hyeon (1935-), and Chung Sang-hwa (1932- ). They received a college education, witnessed the catastrophe of Korean War, and were increasingly discontented with the National Art Exhibition, especially its conservative academicism and institutional bureaucracy. Among the many artists and artist groups that resisted the establishment and urgently called forth new modes of expression, the Contemporary Artists Association (Hyeondae Misul Hyeophoe) emerged as the leading voice. Most of the Informel artists joined the group and regularly presented their works in the Association’s exhibition, the Contemporary Exhibition (Hyeondae-jeon) from 1957. 



The term Informel first appeared in 1956, when critic Kim Young-ju introduced European art’s expressive tendencies in his essay for Chosun-ilbo, a major daily newspaper. However, Korean Informel artists became interested in the movement as a result of the World Art of Today exhibition held at the Art Gallery of Tokyo’s Takashimaya Department Store in 1957. The show ambitiously presented the works of the most prominent artists of European Informel and American Abstract Expressionism side by side with those of Japanese contemporary artists. Michel Tapié, Georges Mathieu, and Sam Francis attended the show’s opening, and Mathieu demonstrated his aggressive gestural painting on an outdoor stage. The presence of these artists considerably excited the Japanese public’s interest in Informel, and the period between 1956 and 1958 is frequently deemed the ‘Informel Cyclone’. 



Therefore, from the end of 1956, ‘Informel’ dominated Japanese art magazines, such as Bijutsu Techo and Mizue. As these magazines were widely available in Korea, they played an important part in disseminating ‘Informel’ in the Korean art scene. The Korean artists, who were already exposed to the Euro-American trends through magazines such as Life, Time, and Art in America, found that the ‘Informel Cyclone’ was a trigger, encouraging them to break away from the stronghold of the National Art Exhibition and to pursue more direct and independent experimentation.



File: ParkSeoBo.jpg

Figure 1. Park Seo-Bo, Painting Number 1, 1957, oil on canvas, 95 x 82 cm, private collection, Seoul

Source: <http://cfile210.uf.daum.net/image/145CE50F4BA73B5A04C56C>



The Contemporary Exhibition’s May 1958 show is regarded as a watershed in the history of Korean Informel, in which Park Seo-bo, Kim Tscahng-yeul, Ha In-doo, among others, participated. In particular, Park Seo-bo’s Painting Number 1 (1957) is claimed to be the first truly non-representational painting. The work’s dynamic lines, freely applied paints, and the thick and barren texture, became the central formal elements of Informel. Following Park’s lead, the other members of the group began eliminating iconic images from their canvases and introduced aggressive bodily movements in their mode of production. Informel became a dominant artistic movement, but it was substituted by the geometric abstraction, optical art, and Dadaesque activities of the younger generation in the mid-1960s.  

Further reading:

 (Chung)

(Kim)

(Oh)