
(Aage) Tom Kristensen (August 4, 1893 in London, UK  June 2, 1974 on
Thur, Denmark)

Tom Kristensen was the most influential exponent of expressionism in 1920s
Denmark. During this period he wrote both poetry and novels that gave voice
to this new literary current. After 1930 Kristensen wrote almost solely
commemorative and occasional poems. In addition to these works, Kristensen
was a productive and influential literary critic and essayist. Kristensen
was deeply  influenced by figures such as Johannes V. Jensen, D.H.
Lawrence, and James Joyce.

[pic][ [http://www.denstoredanske.dk/@api/deki/files/82689/=bd-12-214.jpg]

Just as his contemporary Emil Bnnelycke, Tom Kristensen was inspired by
German expressionism. He made his debut with the collection of poems
Fribytterdrmme (1920), a central work of expressionist poetry in Denmark.
The word drmme [dreams] in the title already indicates the works
expressionist nature: The exotic places described in the poems were not
familiar to Kristensen, but rather served as colorful and sonorous
scenarios (as in the poem Rio de Janeiro). The central poem of the
collection is the revolutionary Landet Atlantis (A Land Called
Atlantis). Although it is inspired by the Russian and German revolutions,
the Atlantis/Utopia of the poem should be read as an aesthetic rather than
a political message. The poems language and gestures are indebted to
Nietzsches Dionysian aesthetics, but the text also demonstrates the
general discrepancy in the poetry of Kristensen between a disharmony
described at the level of content and the strictness of form that actually
represents it: the poem refers to a decomposition of forms, but it does not
follow its own program. This is also true of Itokih!, which takes
Dadaistic pleasure in the sounds of the Maori language, but only as an
exotic refrain in an otherwise metrical poem. No other Danish poet,
however, more successfully achieved the expressionist vision of beauty
beyond harmony than Tom Kristensen did.
           In the 1920s, Kristensen wrote three more collections of poetry:
Mirakler (1922) continued the expressionist style of his earlier work,
Paafuglefjeren (1922) was inspired by his journey to China, and his
Verdslige Sange (1927) praises erotic feeling.
           Kristensen also wrote three novels and a travelogue during the
1920s: the dystopian Livets Arabesk (The Arabesque of Life, 1921), the
psychological exploration En anden (1923), the expressionist travel account
En kavaler i Spanien (1926), and the modern classic Hrvrk (Havoc, 1928).
En anden and Hrvrk were inspired by Joyces stream of consciousness
technique. (In 1931, Kristensen famously reviewed Ulysses, and during his
stay in Copenhagen in 1936, Joyce met Kristensen).  Havoc describes the
collapse of the journalist Ole Jastrau who  feeling trapped by the routine
of his bourgeois life  decides to abandon his job and family in order to
go to the dogs. The main character longs for a catastrophe as a way of
realizing his deepest spiritual self. Thematically, Havoc sums up
Kristensens earlier works, but at the same time it leads to a criticism of
what Kristensen perceived as expressionisms aesthetic nihilism. After
Havoc Kristensen remained an important voice in the cultural life of
Denmark, but mainly as a critic and essayist. Despite Kristensens later
aesthetical self-criticism and political engagement, his main achievement
as an author lies in his expressionist literary production in the 1920s.

Selected Works
Novels
Livets arabesk (1921)
En anden (1923)
Hrvrk (1930)

Poems
Fribytterdrmme (1920)
Paafuglefjeren: digte fra Kina (1922)
Verdslige sange (1927)

English Translations
Havoc. Transl. by Carl Malmberg. Madison/London: University of Wisconsin
Press 1968.
The Land called Atlantis. A Symbol, in: Danish Literary Magazine. Vol. 5
(1993). Transl. by W. Glyn Jones, p. 15.

Further Reading
Byram, Michael S.: Tom Kristensen. Boston: Twayne Publishers 1982.

Internet Resources
Klaus Rifbjerg on Tom Kristensen:
http://www.danskedigtere.sdu.dk/riftk.html
Tom Kristensen on Danish Television (1962):
http://agent.dril.dk/agent/?media=2713<8&style=undervisning
