
Kurtg, Gyrgy (1926-)
William Kinderman

Unlike his friend Gyrgy Ligeti, who emigrated from Hungary in 1956, Gyrgy
Kurtg remained until after the end of the Cold War in Budapest, where he
taught at the Academy of Music. At the time of writing, he remains a key
figure in musical modernism, whose vocal and instrumental works have
received much attention, and whose opera Fin de partie based on Samuel
Beckett's play is eagerly awaited.

Kurtgs style builds on Bartk and Webern and his formidable mastery of
the Western musical legacy. Kurtg was born at Lugos in the Bnt region of
Romania. He became a Hungarian citizen in 1948, but moved to France in
2001, assuming dual citizenship in 2002. In 1947, he married the pianist
Mrta Kinsker, who has contributed importantly to his artistic development.
During 1957-58, he took part in courses with Messiaen and Milhaud in Paris,
overcoming a creative crisis with the support of the Hungarian psychologist
Marianne Stein.

A superb pianist and chamber music coach, Kurtg has composed an extensive
ongoing piano series Jtkok (Games), parts of which he has often performed
in concerts with his wife Mrta, with his own pieces alternating with his
transcriptions of J.S. Bach. He has been a composer-in-residence in Berlin
and Vienna, and received prestigious recognition such as the Ernst von
Siemens Prize and Grawemeyer Award. One of his impressive orchestral works
is Stele (Greek for memorial slab), op. 33, commissioned by the Berlin
Philharmonic Orchestra in 1994. As Alex Ross puts it, this work evokes an
historical reference, whereby Beethovens ghost walks again. Yet as
Kurtg confessed to Claudio Abbado, its concluding seven-note chords have
the rhythm of a gaunt figure staggering on, conveying the irreducible
experience of the individual as a means of conveying aesthetic meaning.

Kurtgs vocal compositions include settings of texts in Hungarian,
Russian, French, English, and German. His cycle of forty songs based on
extracts from Franz Kafkas diaries and letters, the Kafka Fragments, for
soprano and violin, op. 24 (1986), may be regarded as a kind of modernist
Winterreise (Winters Journey). Like Schuberts Winterreise, the Kafka
Fragments center on the archetypal theme of wandering, the seeking of a
path that remains profoundly elusive. The entire second part of the four-
part structure of the cycle is devoted to Der wahre Weg (The true
path), a notion that is interrogated skeptically in this Hommage-message
 Pierre Boulez. The static slowness and hypnotic repetitions of the song,
together with its motives of stumbling and precarious balancing on a
suspended rope, are reminiscent of Schuberts Leiermann (The hurdy-gurdy
man) at the end of Winterreise, while the extensive use of quarter tones
in the violin invites comparison in relation to the last movement of the
last work Bartk completed, his Sonata for Violin Solo.

Characteristically, some features of the Kafka Fragments point beyond,
connecting to other works by Kurtg and other composers. For instance, his
setting of Der begrenzte Kreis (The closed circle) as III/6 of the
Kafka Fragments is linked to a Kafka text, yet also corresponds to parts of
his independent chamber music work, the Hommage  R. Sch., op. 15d. In
turn, the Hommage  R. Sch., like the Kafka Fragments, engages deeply with
the legacy of Robert Schumann, and absorbs his pair of contrasting
characters, Florestan and Eusebius, while also making reference to E.T.A.
Hoffmanns fictional figure, the Kapellmeister Johannes Kreisler. Kurtgs
inscription to the last piece of his Hommage, Meister Raro discovers
Guillaume de Machaut, alludes to Schumanns intermediary figure Raro, a
kind of musicological superego who negotiates between the divergent spheres
of Eusebius and Florestan while exploring medieval isorhythmic technique in
a spirit of fresh creative discovery. Elsewhere in the Kafka Fragments, on
the other hand, Schumanns pair of characters help inspire one of Kurtgs
most operatic inspirations, the Szene in der Elektrischen (Scene in the
electric streetcar), a suggestive dream-vision in which the dancer
Eduardowa is accompanied by two different violinists playing two
contrasting styles of music. As these examples indicate, Kurtgs art
displays an astonishingly rich allusiveness, and its openness to the legacy
of the past proves entirely compatible with the highest originality and
sensitivity of musical expression.

                                  ---William Kinderman

Selected Bibliography

Beckles Willson, Rachel. Ligeti, Kurtg and Hungarian Music during the Cold
War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Farkas, Zoltn, The Path of a Hlderlin Topos: Wandering ideas in Kurtgs
Compositions, Studia Musicologica 43 (2002), 289-310.

Kinderman, William. The Creative Process in Music from Mozart to Kurtg.
Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2012.

Sallis, Friedemann, Robin Elliott, and Kenneth, DeLong, eds. Centre and
Periphery, Roots and Exile: Interpreting the Music of Istvn Anhalt, Gyrgy
Kurtg, and Sndor Veress. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University
Press, 2011.

Varga, Blint Andrs, ed. Gyrgy Kurtg: Three Interviews and Ligeti
Homages. Rochester: University of Rochester Press, 2009.


