L'Année dernière à Marienbad/Last Year at Marienbad

L'Année dernière à Marienbad (1961) is a black and white film directed by Alain Resnais and scripted by the nouveau romancier (new novelist) Alain Robbe-Grillet. The film is considered an example of the cinematic modernist works of the French Nouvelle Vague. It is one of a sequence of films from Resnais’s early career – including Nuit et Brouillard [Night and Fog, 1955] and Hiroshima, mon Amour (1959, scripted by another new novelist, Marguerite Duras) – which question the veracity of collective, historical memory. The association with this avant-garde, literary group alone could position these films in a modernist lineage, yet it was in fact Resnais’s editing, as it evolved through this period and matured in Hiroshima and Marienbad, that was especially innovative. The plot of the film, such as it is, concerns a man (simply referred to as ‘X’ in the script) attempting to persuade a woman (‘A’) that the previous year they met in a palatial hotel or spa and agreed to meet one year later to run away together. The modernist style ensures the narrative is elliptical and hypnagogic, which has inspired a proliferation of academic debate. For example, ‘X’, in voiceover, often suggests a shared history, which is then contradicted in the images, or repeated with differences, allowing for disparate readings. This inherent ambiguity suggests a level of human isolation and disorientation that is a prevailing theme of the art-cinema canon of the 1960s, such as in the films of Ingmar Berman and Michelangelo Antonioni. 

Further Reading:

Armes, R. (1968) The Cinema of Alain Resnais, London and New York, A. Zwemmer Ltd. and A.S. Barnes & co.

Monaco, J. (1978) Alain Resnais; The Rôle of Imagination, London, Martin Secker and Warburg Limited.

Wilson, E. (2006) Alain Resnais, Manchester and New York, Manchester University Press.

Paratextual Material:

The Criterion Collection trailer for L'Année dernière à Marienbad/Last Year at Marienbad:

http://www.criterion.com/films/1517-last-year-at-marienbad



An interview with Alain Resnais about L'Année dernière à Marienbad/Last Year at Marienbad:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTg_knL4cks


A trailer for Hiroshima mon amour: 


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R-VgIR26Eis


Kierran Horner 

King’s College, London