

Anne Charlotte Leffler was one of the most acclaimed Swedish women writers of the modern breakthrough in late-nineteenth-century Scandinavia. Joining the circle known as Young Sweden, a leading literary movement of the 1880s, she was part of the Ibsen-inspired debate about women’s rights, sexual morality, and the normative bourgeois family structure. During her lifetime, Leffler’s plays were performed more frequently than Strindberg’s, and she was known as a notable salon hostess. After her divorce from Gustaf Edgren in 1889, she married the Italian mathematician Pasquale del Pezzo, duke of Cajanello, and settled in Italy. In 1892 she died of appendicitis at the age of forty-three. In her provocative works, sometimes close to popular fiction, Leffler depicts not only dysfunctional middle-class marriages but also nineteenth-century notions of love, in particular eroticism. Her major works are translated into several languages, including English, German, Russian, Italian, Croatian and Dutch.

File: Leffler.jpg

Source: http://www.bokforlagetatlas.se/author/ann-charlotte-leffler/



Anne Charlotte Leffler was one of the most acclaimed Swedish women writers of the modern breakthrough in late-nineteenth-century Scandinavia. Joining the circle known as Young Sweden, a leading literary movement of the 1880s, she was part of the Ibsen-inspired debate about women’s rights, sexual morality, and the normative bourgeois family structure. During her lifetime, Leffler’s plays were performed more frequently than Strindberg’s, and she was known as a notable salon hostess. After her divorce from Gustaf Edgren in 1889, she married the Italian mathematician Pasquale del Pezzo, duke of Cajanello, and settled in Italy. In 1892 she died of appendicitis at the age of forty-three. In her provocative works, sometimes close to popular fiction, Leffler depicts not only dysfunctional middle-class marriages but also nineteenth-century notions of love, in particular eroticism. Her major works are translated into several languages, including English, German, Russian, Italian, Croatian and Dutch.



Anne Charlotte Leffler was born into a cultured Stockholm family that encouraged her to follow her ambitions as a writer. In 1869 she published her first collection of short stories Händelsevis, using the pen name Carlot. Her breakthrough success Skådespelerskan, as well as her second play, Pastorsadjunkten, both performed at the Royal Dramatic theatre in Stockholm, were presented as the works of an anonymous author. In Skådespelerskan, Leffler addresses questions of gender and gender roles as well as the conflict between marriage and career. With the volumes of short stories and novels published under the title Ur Lifvet I-III, she established herself as a socio-realistic author, but also as an important voice in the debate on feminism and the double standards of society. Her greatest success on the stage was her fourth play, Sanna kvinnor. This comedy is a typical example of the feminist ‘indignation drama’ (indignationsdrama) of the eighties, discussing both married women’s right to property and contemporary gender roles. Sonja Kovalevsky: Erinringar, Leffler’s last book, is a portrait of the Russian mathematician Sonja Kovalevsky (1850-1891), the first female full professor in Northern Europe. In collaboration with Kovalevsky, she also wrote the drama Kampen för lyckan.



List of Works:

Händelsevis: Trenne Teckningar af Carlot (1869)

Skådespelerskan (1873)

Pastorsadjunkten (1876)

Ur lifvet I (En bal i societeten, En stor man, En triumf, Dömd, Doktorns hustru, Sesam öppna dig!, Tvifvel) (1882)

Sanna kvinnor (1883)

Ur lifvet II (Aurore Bunge, Barnet, Ett bröllop, I krig med samhället) (1883)

Ur lifvet III (Kvinnlighet och erotik I, Gusten får pastoratet) (1883)

En sommarsaga I-II (1886)

Kvinnlighet och erotik II (1890)

Tre komedier (Den kärleken!, Familjelycka och Moster Malvina) (1892)

Sonja Kovalevsky. Erinringar (1892)



English Translations:

Womanhood and eroticism (1999), translated by M. A. David, Lysaker: Geelmuyden Kiese.



 ‘True Women’ (1996), translated by A. Hanes Harvey, Modern Drama by Women 1880s-1930s. An international anthology, London: Routledge.

Further reading:

 (Hennel)



(Key)



(Palmkvist)



(Wilkinson)