
Legaspi, Cesar Torrente (1917-1994)
Cesar Legaspi was a Filipino painter, known as one of the 13 Moderns, a
motley group of emergent artists whose work, according to artist-art
educator Victorio Edades, was an alternative to the classicism and
nostalgia-laced realism popular amongst academic art educators during the
pre-WWII juncture of the American colonial period.  Along with his peers,
Hernando Ocampo and Vicente Manansala, Legaspi was part of a generation of
artists whose early image making engaged with questions of distortion and
the liberties artists could take in construing reality.  In the early
1950s, these painters were regarded as the Neo-Realist Triumvirate.
Though they produced works dealing with the same everyday subject matter as
conservative art of the period, they also unselfconsciously took from other
stylistic traditions that they encountered through research and peer
exchanges. In doing so they worked towards more individuated ways of
rendering subjects, finding affinities with Cubism, Surrealism, and
Expressionism. In the post-WWII period, the Neo-Realists manifested a
cynicism toward the urbane and they resolved this visually in different
ways.  Legaspis well-known work Gadgets II (1949) from this period depicts
the mutant fusing of man and machine in an age where the industrial was
both feared and mythologiszed.  This work, alongside pieces imaging the
working class including stevedores, grave diggers, beggars, seasonal farm
workers, and internal migrants are associated with his early Proletarian or
proto-Social Realist phase.
[pic]
Cesar Torrente Legaspi, The Planters, 1968, Legaspi Family Collection
(contact author for copyright).
The earliest of Legaspis major oil pieces consisted of muted earth-toned
and compact compositions of figures emerging from stone forms. However,
shifting from advertising to full-time painting in the19 60s allowed him to
further explore materials and stylistic language, including
experimentations with shaped canvases, printmaking, collage and a sustained
affinity with figuration and draughtsmanship. This would eventually give
way to a more vibrant palette that increasingly demonstrated his interest
in broader sets of ideas including more optimistic renderings of the folk
themes that were generally used in the work of the conservatives and
critiqued by modernists as nostalgia for the rural and pre-industrial.
 Legaspi received his art education from the University of the Philippines
School of Fine Arts, the Cultural Hispanica (Madrid), and the Academie
Ranson in Paris, He was a representative of the Philippines to the 1967 Sao
Paulo Biennials of 1967 and 1969.  His acknowledged influences included
Fernando Amorsolo, Carlos Francisco, and his fellow Neo-Realists, Hernando
Ocampo and Vicente Manansala.  Like his aforementioned colleagues, Legaspi
was proclaimed National Artist for Visual Arts (1990).  He passed away in
1994 from complications arising from cancer.
References and further reading
Benesa, L. (2000) What is Philippine about Philippine Art? and Other
Essays. Manila: National Commission for Culture and the Arts.
Guillermo, A. (2001) Cesar Legaspi:  National Artist in Image to Meaning:
 Essays on Philippine Art. Manila: Ateneo de Manila University Press.
Ledesma, P. K. and Guerrero, A. (1974) The Struggle for Philippine Art,
Manila: Purita Kalaw Ledesma.
Ledesma, P. K.  (1987).  The Biggest Little Room, Manila:  Kalaw-Ledesma
Art Foundation.  (
Paras-Perez, R., Benesa, Leonidas, et. al. (1983)   The first Taipei
exhibition of oil paintings and pen and ink drawings by Cesar F. Legaspi,
Taipei:  Gallery A.
_____________.  (1995) Edades and the 13 Moderns, Manila:  Cultural Centre
of the Philippines.
Reyes, C. (1989) Conversations on Philippine Art, Manila: Cultural Center
of the Philippines.
Roces, A. (1993) Legaspi:  The Making of a National Artist, Hong Kong: The
Crucible Workshop.



