
Lejrraga, Mara de la O
Mara [Gregorio] Martnez Sierra (1874-1974)
Mara de la O Lejrraga was a Spanish playwright, novelist, essayist, and
feminist intellectual of the early twentieth century. She published under
her married name, Mara Martnez Sierra, and also pseudonymously under the
full name of her husband, the modernist writer, theatre artist, and
publisher Gregorio Martnez Sierra..Scholars have recently shown that many
works originally attributed to him were actually penned by Lejrraga. She
was a strong and unique feminist voice in literary circles and the
burgeoning womens movement in early twentieth-century Spain.
[pic]
Mara de la O Lejrraga c.1905
http://www.elpais.com/recorte/20060520elpbabens_6/XXLCO/Ies/Maria_Lejarraga.
jpg
Mara de la O Lejrraga was born in San Milln de la Cogolla (La Rioja),
Spain, in 1874. She later studied in Madrid at the Asociacin para la
Enseanza de la Mujer and became a teacher. Despite her professional
teaching career, she was extremely passionate about literature and
maintained a strong desire to write and publish. In 1900 she met and
married the young poet and playwright Gregorio Martnez Sierra and soon
began publishing under his name, composing plays, fiction, and essays. In
this way, she was able to participate in literary circles that were
typically closed to women in early twentieth-century Spain; however, she
received little to no credit for her work. The husband-and-wife pair
collaborated for decades in what many scholars have categorized as an
exploitative relationship, given that Lejrraga earned little compensation
or recognition. Moreover, in 1906 Gregorio fell in love with a young
actress, Catalina Brcena, who worked in his theater. Lejrraga suffered in
her marriage as a result of his infidelity, which she tolerated until 1922
when Catalina gave birth to Gregorios daughter. Nevertheless, even after
their separation, Lejrraga continued to write for him and to use his name
when publishing.
Lejrraga first published a collection of short stories for children in
1899, which is the only literature she wrote that bears her own name. The
most well-known play written with her male pseudonym is Cancin de cuna
[Cradle Song], which premiered in Madrid in 1911. Originally attributed to
Gregorio, it has since been identified as her work. The careful development
of complex female characters was praised as innovative for early twentieth-
century Spanish theater, and the drama was soon translated to English and
has inspired four film adaptations. Her other popular dramas [comedias]
include Tragedia de la perra viva, Sueos en la venta, and La abuela vive
en s. Lejrraga also composed libretos for the elaborate theatrical
productions El amor brujo and El sombrero de tres picos. Lejrragas
literary output under her husbands name is indeed vast, and her oeuvre
includes novels, poems, plays, and essays. One of her first long novels, T
eres la paz (1906), was a best-seller; other titles include La humilde
verdad, El amor catedrtico, and Sol de la tarde. Together with Cancin de
Cuna, these publications established Martnez Sierra as a respectable
name within modernist literary and intellectual circles in Spain.
During the 1920s and 1930s, Lejrraga was a vocal and active feminist in an
otherwise relatively muted Spanish womens movement. She was affiliated
with the Socialist party and became one of the first women to participate
in government when she was elected as a representative to the Republican
Congress (for Granada) in 1932. Prior to the beginning of the Second
Spanish Republic, Lejrraga gave public speeches on feminism and the
womens movement, working particularly hard to inspire middle-class women.
As a vocal socialist and feminist intellectual during the Republic,
Lejrraga was forced into exile in France during the Spanish Civil War and
subsequent years of Francos dictatorship. She traveled to New York and
then lived for a while in Mexico before moving permanently to Buenos Aires,
where she continued writing literature and journalistic prose. In 1952
Lejrraga published the first of two autobiographical texts, Una mujer por
caminos de Espaa, in which she detailed her participation in Spanish
politics prior to the Civil War. Her second memoir, Gregorio y yo. Medio
siglo de colaboracin [Gregorio and I: Half a Century of Collaboration],
reveals her true role as the principal author of many plays and novels
written under the name Gregorio.
Lejrraga stands out among her fiction-writing female contemporaries for
her essayistic prose. Under the name Gregorio, she published five lengthy
essays detailing the most important aspects of feminism, her particular
stance as a Spaniard, and the need for feminist reforms in Spain. These
include Feminisimo, Feminidad, y Espaolismo (1917); La mujer moderna
(1920); and La mujer espaola ante la Repblica (1932). She aimed to
redefine Spanish womens traditional role, which had been defined
exclusively through the ideological discourse of domesticity. Crucial to
her discursive strategy was a reconceptualization of domesticity and
motherhood in which she rejected the glorification of female passivity and
self-sacrifice. Lejrraga proposed that women construct a notion of
citizenship that would allow for motherhood to be combined with
participation in the public sphere, thus intertwining maternity and
patriotism. The themes of motherhood and maternity are in fact central to
both her fictional and non-fictional publications. In light of the recent
discovery of her authorship of Gregorio Martnez Sierras works,
contemporary feminists and literary scholars are re-examining her life and
literary production in order to gain new insights into the changing role of
Spanish women in literature, politics, and social movements during the
early twentieth century.
Lejrraga died in Buenos Aires, Argentina in 1974.

List of Select Works
Martnez Sierra, Gregorio [Mara]. (1911) Cancin de cuna; Lirio entre
espinas; El ideal. Madrid: Biblioteca Renacimiento. [In English: (1922) The
Cradle Song, and Other Plays, trans. John Garret Underhill and May Heywood
Broun, New York: E.P. Dutton.]

Martnez Sierra, Gregorio [Mara]. (1920) La mujer moderna, Madrid:
Editorial Saturnino Calleja, S.A.

---------- (1920) T eres la paz. Madrid: Estrella. [In English: (1921) Ana
Mara, trans. Emmons Crocker. Boston: R.G. Badger.]


Martnez Sierra, Gregorio [Mara]. (2003) Ed. Alda Blanco. A las mujeres:
Ensayos feministas de Mara Martnez Sierra, Logroo: Gobierno de la Rioja,
Instituto de studios Riojanos.

Martnez Sierra, Mara. (1952) Una mujer por caminos de Espaa, ed. Alda
Blanco, Madrid: Castalia. Instituto de la Mujer.

---------- (1953) Gregorio y yo. Medio siglo de colaboracin, ed. Alda
Blanco, Valencia: Pre-textos.


References and Further Reading
Blanco, Alda. (2009) Maternidad, libertad y feminismo en el pensamiento de
Mara Martnez Sierra, in Roles de gnero y cambio social en la literatura
espaola del siglo XX, ed. Pilar Nieva-de la Paz, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 65-83.

Ciallella, Louise. (2007) Quixotic Modernists: Reading Gender, in Tristana,
Trigo and Martnez Sierra, Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press.
Johnson, Roberta. (2003) Gender and Nation in the Spanish Modernist Novel,
Nashville: Vanderbilt.
Mujeres en la historia  Mara de la O Lejrraga. (1998) Radio y Televisin
Espaola, http://www.rtve.es/alacarta/videos/mujeres-en-la-historia/mujeres-
historia-maria-lejarraga/838011/
OConnor, Patricia W. (2003) Mito y realidad de una dramaturga espaola,
Mara Martnez Sierra, Logroo: Instituto de Estudios Riojanos.
Rodrigo, Antonio. (2005) Mara Lejrraga: Una mujer en la sombra, Madrid:
Algaba.

Rebecca Bender, Grinnell College
