

Lucien Lévy-Brühl was a French philosopher who taught philosophy at the Sorbonne from 1899 to 1927. Investigating the psychology of ‘primitive’ societies, his book Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés primitives (1910) made a distinguished contribution to the study of archaic religion and mythology, shaping the budding discipline of anthropology. Lévy-Brühl’s interest in irrational as well as mystical forms of engagement with the world – thought to be characteristic of ‘primitive’ societies – inflected subsequent research towards a pluralistic and relativistic sociology.

Lucien Lévy-Brühl was a French philosopher who taught philosophy at the Sorbonne from 1899 to 1927. Investigating the psychology of ‘primitive’ societies, his book Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés primitives (1910) made a distinguished contribution to the study of archaic religion and mythology, shaping the budding discipline of anthropology. Lévy-Brühl’s interest in irrational as well as mystical forms of engagement with the world – thought to be characteristic of ‘primitive’ societies – inflected subsequent research towards a pluralistic and relativistic sociology. Elaborating the controversial notion of ‘primitive mentality’ in La mentalité primitive (1922), he posited a distinctively non-logical mode of thinking governed by a mystical ‘law of participation’, which caused the subject to experience the world as one, in a manner that overrode Western dichotomies and collapsed logical distinctions. An acquaintance of Sigmund Freud, Lévy-Brühl provided a generation of artists and writers with privileged access to irrational – if not wholly unconscious – schemes of thought. For many, such ‘primitivism’ held the keys to escape a rigidly logical Western mindset. While T. S. Eliot gained first-hand knowledge of Lévy-Brühl’s writings, surrealist circles seized his formulation of the ‘law of participation’ as model for their ‘ethnographic surrealism’, adopting his views on magic as a form of mystical experience.



List of Works

(1949) Les Carnets de Lévy-Brühl, Paris: P.U.F. 

(1910) Les Fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inferieures, Paris: Alcan, trans. L. A. Clare as How Natives Think, London: Allen and Unwin, 1926.

(1922) La Mentalité primitive, Paris: Alcan.

(1928) L’Âme primitive, Paris: Alcan, trans. L. A. Clare as The ‘Soul’ of the Primitive, New York: Macmillan Co.

(1931) Le Surnaturel et la nature dans la mentalité primitive, Paris: Alcan.

(1935) La Mythologie primitive, Paris: Alcan.

Further reading:

(Cazeneuve)

(Harmon)

(Levinas)

(Mauss)

(Mercier)

(Segal)