
Leyda, Jay (February 12, 1910- February 15, 1988)

Sueyoung Park-Primiano (New York University)

Jay Leyda's peripatetic life and protean career  cut  a  unique,  remarkable
path. The long list of  roles  he  mined  include  filmmaker,  photographer,
critic, archivist, art dealer, translator, librettist, and educator.  He  is
best remembered, however, as a leading historian of  early  and  Soviet  and
Chinese cinemas, interests he started to develop in the vibrant  art  circle
he helped establish in New York City in the 1930s.

Born in Detroit, Michigan, Leyda was raised by his  grandmother  in  Dayton,
Ohio. His artistic training started early; after studying photography  under
Jane Reece, he moved to New York City in 1929 to  work  as  Ralph  Steiner's
darkroom assistant. After a year of working  for  Steiner,  Leyda  left  and
supported himself by freelancing as  a  portrait  photographer  for  various
magazines, including Vanity Fair and Arts Weekly; in this  capacity  he  met
and photographed Alfred Barr, the first director of  the  Museum  of  Modern
Art (MoMA) and the person largely  responsible  for  establishing  its  film
library. Leyda also secured a position as sound and  recording  arranger  at
the Bronx Playhouse, where he was exposed to repeated showings of  films  by
internationally acclaimed directors including Sergei  Eisenstein  and  Dziga
Vertov. While working at the Playhouse, he became familiar  with  the  Bronx
neighborhood where he met the Schultz  family  who  had  recently  emigrated
from the Soviet Union. Coincidentally, Mr. Schultz's wife was the sister  of
the woman who played the part of  the  mother  with  the  baby  carriage  in
Eisenstein's Battleship Potemkin (1925). In 1931, Leyda purchased  an  Eyemo
camera and made A Bronx Morning (1932). The ownership of the camera  granted
him active membership with the Workers'  Film  and  Photo  League  for  whom
Leyda worked mainly as a newsreel cameraman. Around the same  time,  through
his affiliation with the  Julien  Levy  Gallery,  Leyda  met  Walker  Evans,
Alfred Stieglitz, and other  photographers  and  filmmakers.  Levy  and  his
friends formed the New York Film Society in 1933, and Leyda worked for  both
the Film Society and the Film Forum, established around  the  same  time  as
the Society but with a leftist bent.

In late 1933, with only a month of instruction in Russian,  Leyda  left  for
Moscow to attend the Moscow State Film School where he was admitted  to  the
camera department. It was here that he met his  future  wife,  Si-lan  Chen,
through her sister Yolanda  who  was  a  fellow  student.  Leyda  eventually
transferred into the directing department after a  successful  screening  of
his film A Bronx Morning to Eisenstein and Vertov. From here on,  Eisenstein
became Leyda's mentor and his strongest influence;  in  turn,  Leyda  became
Eisenstein's confidant and English-language ambassador.  In  the  summer  of
1934, Leyda briefly worked for Vertov and Joris Ivens. In January  1935,  he
joined  Eisenstein's  crew  to  work  on  Bezhin  Meadow  (1937)  as   still
photographer and production historian. He also married Si-lan Chen  who  was
a dancer and choreographer and the daughter of Eugene Chen who had been  Sun
Yat-sen's secretary.

In 1936 Leyda accepted Alfred Barr's offer for the position as assistant  to
Iris  Barry  in  the  newly  established  film  department  at  MoMA.  Leyda
introduced Barry to Eisenstein, and they took with  them  Eisenstein's  only
reliable print of Potemkin when they left Soviet Union to continue  to  tour
Europe and collect materials for MoMA. Back in New York,  Leyda  immediately
began work on a history of  Soviet  film  commissioned  by  the  Rockefeller
Foundation. Eager to share with others  what  he  learned  from  Eisenstein,
Leyda joined Frontier Films, a leftist organization founded by  veterans  of
the Workers' Film and Photo League, and moonlighted as  editor  and  adviser
under the pseudonym Eugene Hill. After  editing  People  of  the  Cumberland
(1937) and China Strikes Back (1937), Leyda  reduced  his  participation  to
acting as consultant on other Frontier projects. In 1939,  Leyda  co-founded
and co-edited the magazine Films, which folded after one  year  due  to  the
financier's mismanagement. In August 1940, Leyda was forced  to  resign  his
position at MoMA because of his political affiliation, something that  would
plague  him  the  following  decades.  Unemployed  and  faced  with  limited
options, Leyda worked for ArtKino until it dissolved.

In 1942, he and his wife moved to Hollywood to consult for  Warner  Brothers
on Russian subjects for Mission to Moscow (1943) and  for  MGM  on  Song  of
Russia (1944). Around this time Leyda began translating Eisenstein's  essays
at the directors behest, to be later published as  The  Film  Sense  (1942)
and Film Form (1949). When work in Hollywood became increasingly scarce  due
to blacklisting and mounting  anti-communism,  Leyda  engaged  in  scholarly
research on other interests he  shared  with  Eisenstein:  Russian  composer
Modest Mussorgsky, Herman Melville, and Emily Dickinson. He secured  several
Guggenheim Fellowships to help him financially, and in 1950  Leyda  and  his
wife left Hollywood for the East Coast and eventually relocated to London.

In 1958 Si-lan Chen was invited to teach choreography in Beijing  and  Leyda
accompanied his wife. He gained access to the Chinese film  archives,  where
he researched what turned out to be  the  first  detailed  book  on  Chinese
films, Dianying: Electric Shadows (1972). He also began a memorandum on  the
uses and values of film archives that developed into a book  on  compilation
documentaries, Films Beget Films (1964). From 1964 to 1969, Leyda worked  at
the Staatliches Filmarchiv in East  Berlin,  after  which  he  took  various
teaching positions at Yale and York Universities. From 1973 to  1987,  Leyda
taught at New York University where he influenced and inspired a  long  list
of future film historians and filmmakers.


List of Works (film and publications in chronological order)

Leyda, J. (1932) A Bronx Morning. Film. 16mm silent b&w.

Eisenstein, S. (1942) The Film Sense. Ed. and trans. by J. Leyda. New  York:
Harcourt Brace.

Leyda, J. and S. Bertensson, eds. (1947) The Musorgsky  Reader:  a  Life  of
Modeste Petrovich  Musorgsky  in  Letters  and  Documents.  New  York:  W.W.
Norton.

Eisenstein, S. (1949) Film Form: Essays in Film Theory. Ed.  and  trans.  by
J. Leyda. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Leyda, J., ed. (1949) The Complete Stories of  Herman  Melville.  New  York:
Random House.

Leyda, J. (1951) The Melville Log; a Documentary Life  of  Herman  Melville,
1819-1891. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

------, ed. (1952) The Portable Melville. New York: Viking Press.

Bertensson, S. and J.  Leyda  (1956)  Sergei  Rachmaninoff:  a  Lifetime  in
Music. New York: New York University Press.

Leyda, J. (1960) Kino: a History of the Russian and Soviet film.  New  York:
Macmillan.

------ (1960) The Years and  Hours  of  Emily  Dickinson.  New  Haven:  Yale
University Press.

------ (1964) Films Beget Films: a Study of the Compilation Film. New  York:
Hill and Wang.

Lawson, J. and J. Leyda (1964) Film, the Creative Process:  the  Search  for
an Audio-visual Language and Structure. New York: Hill and Wang.

Klaue, W. and J. Leyda (1964) Robert Flaherty. Berlin:  Henschelverlag.  (In
German. Includes Leyda's essay, 'Das Flaherty-Erbe'.)

Eisenstein, S. (1968) Film Essays, with a Lecture.  Ed.  and  trans.  by  J.
Leyda. London: Dobson. (Includes  Leyda's  'The  Published  Writings  (1922-
1964) of Sergei Eisenstein, with notes on their English translations'.)

Nizhni, V., I. Montagu, and J. Leyda (1969) Lessons  with  Eisenstein.  New
York: Hill and Hang.

Leyda, J. (1972) Dianying: Electric Shadows, an Account  of  Films  and  the
Film Audience in China. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Eisenstein, S. (1974) Eisenstein: Three  Films.  Ed.  by  Leyda,  trans.  by
Diana Matias. New  York:  Harper  &  Row.  (Includes  annotated  scripts  of
Battleship Potemkin, October, and Alexander Nevsky).

Leyda, J. (1977) Voices of Film Experience: 1894 to the Present.  New  York:
Macmillan.

Leyda, J. and Z. Voynow (1980) Eisenstein at Work. New York: Pantheon  Books
and the Museum of Modern Art. (Written  with  the  help  of  the  Eisenstein
Committee in Moscow)

Eisenstein, S. and J. Leyda (1985) A Premature Celebration  of  Eisenstein's
Centenary. Calcutta: Seagull Books.

Eisenstein, S. and J. Leyda (1986) Eisenstein on Disney. London: Methuen.


References and further reading

Michelson, A. (1988) 'Jay Leyda: 1910-1988', Cinema Journal 28 (1): 12-16.

Radosh, R. an A. Radosh (2004) 'A Great  Historic  Mistake:  the  Making  of
Mission to Moscow', Film History 16 (4): 358-377.

Sbardellati, J. (2008) 'Brassbound  G-Men  and  Celluloid  Reds:  the  FBI's
Search for Communist Propaganda in Wartime Hollywood', Film History 20  (4):
412-436.

Uricchio, W. (1995) 'The City Viewed: the  Films  of  Leyda,  Browning,  and
Weinberg', Lovers of Cinema: the  First  American  Film  Avant-Garde,  1919-
1945. J. Horak, ed. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.



