

Lim Hak Tai, a Chinese émigré artist based in Singapore, was the founding principal and dean of the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (NAFA). Established officially in 1938, with support from Jimei School Overseas Fellowship Association and the Society of Chinese Artists, NAFA was the first local academy offering tertiary art education in Southeast Asia and was instrumental, under Lim’s leadership, in nurturing Malayan (present-day Singapore and Malaysia) modern art practitioners. Modelled primarily on the curriculum of Xiamen Academy of Fine Arts, NAFA offered training in both Western art and Chinese painting.

Lim Hak Tai, a Chinese émigré artist based in Singapore, was the founding principal and dean of the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (NAFA). Established officially in 1938, with support from Jimei School Overseas Fellowship Association and the Society of Chinese Artists, NAFA was the first local academy offering tertiary art education in Southeast Asia and was instrumental, under Lim’s leadership, in nurturing Malayan (present-day Singapore and Malaysia) modern art practitioners. Modelled primarily on the curriculum of Xiamen Academy of Fine Arts, NAFA offered training in both Western art and Chinese painting. Lim’s influential vision, to cultivate a Nanyang (style) art that reflected the reality of Nanyang (South Seas) in the articulation of tropical colours, cultures and local flavour, was integral to the academy’s objectives and was elaborated in his articles and speeches. As much of his energy was expended on teaching and operating the school, Lim left behind few works, approximately 100 artworks ranging from oil paintings, Chinese paintings and calligraphy.



Born on May 1893 in Xiamen, Lim was a trained Applied Arts and Mathematics teacher from the Fujian Teachers’ Training College. His teaching vocation included Jimei College and Xiamen Academy of Fine Arts which he co-founded in 1923. In 1962, he was awarded the Certificate of Honour at Singapore’s first National Day honours ceremony. He passed away in 1963 after battling a series of illnesses. He was succeeded by his son, Lim Yew Kuan, who was principal of NAFA between 1963-1979.

Further reading:

(Crossing Visions: Singapore and Xiamen: Lim Hak Tai and Lim Yew Kuan)

(Lim Hak Tai: Quintessential Nanyang)

(Ong)

(Piyadasa and Sabapathy)

(Tan)