
Contributor: Dan Wylie

Entry: Livingstone, Douglas (James) (1932-1996)

Douglas Livingstone is regularly cited as South  Africas  pre-eminent  poet
of the twentieth century.  Born in Malaysia, but settling  in  South  Africa
at the age of ten,  he  made  Durban,  Natal,  his  home,  microbiology  his
career, and poetry his central passion.  He published eight  collections  of
poems, excluding the Selected Poems (1984) and the Collected  Poems  (2004),
as well as hundreds of uncollected pieces, essays, and scientific  articles.
 His work displays an increasing concern with the ecological health  of  his
home region and of the planet as a whole.

Douglas James Livingstone was born in Kuala Lumpur,  Malaysia,  to  Scottish
parents.  His father having been taken prisoner-of-war by  the  Japanese  in
1941, he was evacuated first to Ceylon, then to Natal, South  Africa,  where
he began writing poems at Kearnsey College.   Leaving  school  in  1951,  he
worked as a laboratory technician in the then Salisbury, Rhodesia, where  he
trained as a bacteriologist at the Pasteur  Institute.   Terrifying  holiday
work as a contract diver on the dam wall at Kariba, on  the  Zambezi  River,
provided the material for striking poems in, as well as the  title  of,  The
Skull in the Mud (1960).  This first collection, while uncertain  in  voice,
already evinces Livingstones trademark concerns with personal isolation  on
a rough and predatory continent,  close  observation  of  disaffected  city-
dwellers, and  difficult  love.   It  also  foreshadows  both  Livingstones
capacity for verbal inventiveness and meticulous craftsmanship.

In 1958 he obtained his BSc degree,  and  in  1989,  his  PhD.   Livingstone
joined the CSIR (Council for Scientific and Industrial Research)  in  Durban
as a bacteriologist particularly concerned with marine pollution.  Over  the
next twenty years, Livingstones voice became more assured  and  individual.
Particularly strong is a tone of ironic  detachment,  sometimes  verging  on
parody.  Little critical attention has been paid to  his  Giovanni  Jacopo
poems, for which Livingstone adapts a suite  of  seventeenth-century  poetic
techniques  to  send  up  a  wide  variety  of  otherwise  serious   themes.
Livingstones gift for evoking the African  animal  world  also  emerges  in
unsparing  detail.   He  was  criticised  by  some  for  failing  to  engage
adequately with the political ramifications of apartheid;  though  he  often
referred to the social consequences of race discrimination.

Increasingly present are scientific images and  vocabularies,  ranging  from
the microbial to the cosmic, integral to a compassionate but  uncompromising
Darwinian vision of lifes struggles.  Livingstone deplored  the  ecological
damage he observed humanity inflicting on the planet.   His  quixotic  quest
to address this damage is encapsulated in his final collection,  A  Littoral
Zone, whose poems are based  on  the  coastal  pollution-measuring  stations
which Livingstone monitored.  They range from moving accounts of both  human
and animal fatalities on the beachfront,  encounters  with  sad  individuals
trapped by social dynamics beyond their  control,  to  fable-like  fantasies
(particularly about women).  The collection as a whole is testament  to  the
variety of voices and the poetic craftsmanship of which  Livingstone  became
a genuine master.

Livingstone was recognised as perhaps the  strongest  poetic  voice  of  his
day, garnering several prizes.  He died of cancer in 1996, aged sixty-four.

References and further reading
Brown, D. (2006) To Speak of this Land, Pietermaritzburg: UKZN Press.
Chapman, M. (1981) Douglas Livingstone: A  critical  study  of  his  poetry,
Johannesburg: Ad Donker. (The only  book-length  monograph  on  Livingstone,
published before his final work was produced.)
Stevens, Mariss. (2004)  Unpublished  MA,  Rhodes  University,  Grahamstown.
(The best study of Livingstones ecological vision, focussed on  A  Littoral
Zone.)
Wylie, Dan. (2011)  Douglas  Livingstones  (Im)possible  Bioregion.   In:
Cheryl  Glotfelty  et  al,  eds.   The  Bioregional  Imagination,   Atlanta:
University of  Georgia  Press.  (Applies  a  bioregional  perspective  to  A
Littoral Zone.)


List of works
The Skull in the Mud (1960)
Sjambok, and other poems from Africa (1964)
Poems (with Thomas Kinsella and Anne Sexton) (1968)
Eyes Closed Against the Sun (1970)
The Sea, My Winding Sheet and other poems (play and poems, 1971)
A Rosary of Bone (1975)
The Semblance of the Real (play, 1976)
A Rhino for the Boardroom (play, 1977)
The Anvils Undertone (1978)
Selected Poems (1984)
A Littoral Zone (1991)
Giovanni Jacopo Meditates (on the high-IQ haiku) (1995)
A Ruthless Fidelity: The Collected Poems of Douglas Livingstone.  Edited  by
Malcolm Hacksley and Don Maclennan (2004)

Translations
Eight Shona Poems (1968)
Wilson Chivaura: Dreams (1974)

Selected critical works
Preface to the poets, Rhodesian Poetry (1967)
On the Writing of Poetry, Izwe (1974)
A Poet Speaks of his Craft (1975)
Africa within us...? (1976)
The Poetry of  Mtshali,  Serote,  Sepamla,  and  others  in  English,  New
Classic (1976)
Preface for the Readers, Rhodesian Poetry (1977)

