
Helen Little                                                  870 words

Lowry, Laurence Stephen (1887  1976)

L. S. Lowry was a modern British artist celebrated for his depictions of
Salford and Manchester. As well as making portraits, landscapes and
seascapes, he is best known for painting what the artist called the
industrial scene, by which he meant the physical fabric of Britains
industrial north, its distinctive sense of place and accompanying
phenomenon of working class culture. Often populated with crowds of people
set amidst a backdrop of terraced streets, mills and factories, Lowrys
urban scenes speak to the regions identity as pioneer of the industrial
revolution as well as the radical social, economic and environmental
upheaval of the early twentieth century. Lowry is commonly perceived to be
a provincial and uniquely British artist, yet part of his story is that in
Manchester he made a vital connection with late-19th century French
painting. In 1905 Lowry studied at Manchester Municipal College of Art
under the talented late Impressionist Adolphe Valette (1876-1942) who
introduced him to Impressionism. After discovering new artistic
possibilities and beauty in his industrial environment, Lowrys early
paintings and drawings revealed a great pathos for the unlovely aspects of
the city. Like the French painters of modern life Camille Pissarro (1830-
1903), Georges Seurat (1859-1891) and Vincent van Gogh (1853-1890), Lowry
shared a deep unease with the present and his place in it  which the
French poet and critic Charles Baudelaire (1821-1867) characterised as a
defining characteristic of modern life.


Lowry was born in 1887 in Stretford, Manchester. His father was an estate
agent and his mother had aspirations to become a concert pianist. They
lived in a relatively affluent middle class area of Victoria Park until
1909 when the family were forced by financial circumstances to move to the
less respectable area of Pendlebury in Salford, where for the first time
Lowry was able to walk from his home and encounter crowded streets
dominated by factories, cotton mills and coal mines. The following year
Lowry took a job as a rent collector with the Manchester Pall Mall Property
Company, a fact he concealed from the art world.


Walking the streets of Manchester on his daily round, Lowry witnessed the
lives of ordinary people and the everyday dramas, incidents, and tragedies
that became the raw material for his art. A distinctive characteristic of
Lowry's paintings from the late 1920s onwards is his use of a shadowless
white background, which gives his pictures a raw and dreamlike quality.
Though he knew the streets of Salford intimately, Lowrys art is not
straightforwardly realist and he often created images from his memory or
imagination, incorporating topographically accurate facets of the urban
environment recorded in sketchbooks and drawings into new composite and
experimental arrangements.

[pic]
L. S. Lowry Coming out of School 1927

http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/lowry-coming-out-of-school-n05912

During the 1930s and 40s Lowrys work shifted from an emphasis on human
social interaction to the impact of industrialisation on nature with a
series of bleak, apocalyptic landscapes that were recognised as symptomatic
of a crisis of nostalgia, anxiety and uncertainty that was gaining currency
in the art of Graham Sutherland (1903-1980) and Francis Bacon (1909-1992).
After the Second World War his images became increasingly caricatured in
style as he responded to the new optimism of the working class under the
Labour government, painting seaside holidays and other new leisure pursuits
and the Queens Coronation as well as a series of portraits of outcasts and
misfits of society. Lowry always considered himself an enemy of social
distinction and at the height of his dominance in the British art world
during the 1950s he declined an OBE, a CBE, a knighthood, and the Companion
of Honour, holding the record for the highest number of declined honours.

[pic]
L. S. Lowry Industrial Landscape 1955

http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/lowry-industrial-landscape-t00111

In 1952 Lowry retired aged 65 with a full pension from the Pall Mall
Property Company, the same year the first monograph on his art was
published. In it Lowry is laid down as one of the originals of modern art
whose voice lay within a tradition of the eccentric and isolated outsider,
untainted by the avant-garde. After his retirement Lowry travelled
extensively throughout the British Isles, painting among other things rural
landscapes in Cornwall and the North East coast. In 1950 Lowry was
commissioned to paint a large canvas for the Festival of Britain exhibition
60 Paintings for 51 which renewed his interest in the industrial landscape,
kick-starting a series of large panoramas that respond to Britains rapid
industrial decline, their tone of collapse and loss bidding farewell to the
subject he had made his own.

Lowry died on 23 February 1976 at Woods Hospital, Glossop, following an
attack of pneumonia. In September that year, the largest exhibition of
Lowrys work to date took place at The Royal Academy of Arts, London.

References and further reading:

Clark, T. J. and Wagner, Anne (2013) Lowry and the Painting of Modern Life
(exh. cat), London, Tate Britain.
Howard, M and Wildman, C (2012) Lowry (exh. cat), Nottingham: Djanogly Art
Gallery.
Howard, M (2000) Lowry: A Visionary Artist, Salford: Lowry Press.
Leber, M and Sandling, J (1995) L. S. Lowry, London: Phaidon Press.
Rhode, S (1999) L. S. Lowry: A Biography, Salford: Lowry Press.

