
Routledge Encyclopedia of Modernism: Lu Xun (, 1881-1936)
Flora Shao

  Lu Xun (penname of Zhou Shuren , 1881-1936), a  preeminent  man  of
letters in twentieth-century China, is widely  regarded  as  the  father  of
modern Chinese literature.  Writing  during  Chinas  tumultuous  transition
from a dynastic empire into modern nation-state,  Lu  Xun  was  one  of  the
leading practitioners of the nationalist  New  Literature  as  well  as  a
driving force  behind  the  iconoclastic  New  Culture  Movement  and  other
intellectual reforms. His works have been  celebrated  for  their  trenchant
critique of the cultural malaise of  the  Chinese  society.  His  inimitable
style of acute self-reflexivity, combined with dark sarcasm, set an  example
for later writers who were similarly engaged in  literature  as  a  form  of
social critique. Lu  Xun  creatively  reworked  nineteenth-century  European
Realism and  the  Chinese  literary  tradition,  experimenting  boldly  with
different narrative devices and aesthetic forms. Throughout the  history  of
modern Chinese literature, Lu Xun has been a much emulated model  for  novel
modes of literary conception and expression, and  his  role  as  a  cultural
icon has also been widely appropriated for different ideological ends.
  A native of Shaoxing, Zhejiang province, the young Lu Xun was  dispirited
by Confucian Classics and travelled to Nanjing to study Western  science  in
1898. There he developed  an  enduring  interest  in  Social  Darwinism  and
recognized the significance  of  literature  in  reformist  nationalism.  In
1906, while studying medicine in Japan, he saw a lanternslide  that  depicts
a group of  indifferent  Chinese  bystanders  watching  an  execution  of  a
Chinese spy by the Japanese soldiers.  Dumbfounded  by  the  apathy  of  his
countrymen, Lu Xun resolved to give up medicine for literature, in hopes  of
diagnosing and curing the more  urgent  spiritual  disease  of  the  Chinese
nation.
  After turning to literary pursuits, he published  several  early  essays,
including On the Aberrant Development of Culture  (,  1906)  and
On  the  Power  of  Mara  Poetry   (,   1908).   Displaying   an
evolutionary mode of  thinking  conjoined  with  Nietzschean  individualism,
these essays advocate the fostering of  individual  personalities  and  call
for an enlightened national voice. Stories from Abroad  (,  1909),
a collection of primarily translated Russian and Eastern  European  fiction,
champions the spirit of militant,  patriotic  resistance  of  the  oppressed
nations. Although these attempts provoked little  popular  reaction  at  the
time, Lu Xuns work continued to dissect the ills of modern  China  under  a
national and international lens.
  In 1918, Lu Xun published Diary of a Madman () in New Youth,  a
leading forum for attacking  Confucianism  and  promoting  Western  thought.
This story depicts a mad intellectual who, upon suspecting  his  family  and
friends for conspiring to murder him, indicts China for engaging in  a  four
thousand-year history of cannibalism. The madmans metaphorical critique  of
the  Chinese  cultures  barbarism  dovetailed  with  the  prevailing  anti-
traditionalist pathos of the era  and  took  the  audience  by  storm.  Most
readers read the story as a straightforward indictment of  Chinese  society.
Its complex narrative devices--mixed linguistic styles,  shifting  authorial
voices, and reliance on the perspective of a madman who in the end  recovers
from  his  madness--suggest  Lu  Xuns  equivocal   attitude   towards   the
revelatory force of literature and set a  bar  for  a  new  literature  that
privileged the short story form as a new, modern platform. The image of  the
madman, which embodies the notions of lunacy and enlightenment, recurs  in
later stories, such as The White  Light  (,  1922)  and  The  Eternal
Lamp (, 1925).
  The doomed fate of the lone madman is  sharpened  by  the  image  of  the
masses. The crowd, due to its apathy and  atomized  consciousness,  is  also
held responsible for Chinas stagnation. The True Story of Ah Q  (Q,
1921) depicts a peasant who reconciles himself to  misfortune  by  reversing
the  blame  of  his  own  failures   through   self-declared   psychological
victories. Situated against the backdrop of the 1911 Revolution,  the  story
is often taken as a critique of the Chinese national  character,  scathingly
presented as parochial, hierarchical, and  opportunistic.  Nonetheless,  the
character Ah Q has been defended, at  other  times,  as  a  more  charitable
model of the Chinese national character.
  Lu Xuns second story collection, Wandering (, 1926), like his  first
collection, the  similarly  artistically  innovative  Outcry  (,  1923),
engages with the turbulent politics of  the  Republican  period  while  also
inquiring into the social meaning  of  individual  existence.  Most  of  the
characters are frustrated, hesitating intellectuals who are uncertain  about
their own course of action and that of the society  at  large.  Si  Ming,  a
character from Soap (, 1924), for instance, is a conservative  scholar
who abhors Western learning and commodities. Master Gao  (,  1925)
features a teacher who is torn between  a  revolutionary  self  who  admires
Maxim Gorky (1868-1936) and values grand historical views,  and  a  cowardly
self that could not even control a classroom. A Happy Family  (,
1924) renders more explicitly the discrepancy between an ideal,  westernized
marital life and the  petty,  sometimes  suffocating,  reality  of  everyday
existence.
  In addition to fiction, Lu Xuns corpus encompasses prose poetry, essays,
and literary criticism. The  prose  poetry  collection,  Wild  Grass  (,
1927)  in  particular,  is  important  for  its  remarkable  expression   of
philosophical aesthetics and use of  paradoxical  figures.  He  was  also  a
passionate advocate for woodblock  printing  as  an  expressive  modern  art
form. He left a most  important  literary  legacy  in  modern  China,  which
earned him the name of, among others, the Chinese Gorky.

Selected works:

Complete works of Lu Xun (2005)
Outcry (1923)
Brief History of Chinese Fiction (1925)
Wandering (1926)
Grave (1927)
Wiled Grass (1927)
Dawn Blossoms Plucked at Dusk (1928)
Old Tales Retold (1936)

References & further reading:

Lee, Leo Ou-fan. Voices from the Iron House: A Study of Lu Xun (1987)
____, ed. Lu Xun and His Legacy (1985)
