

Manto, Saadat Hasan (1912-1955)

و‏‏سعادت حسن منٹ

Saadat Hasan Manto is one of the foremost writers of the Indian subcontinent in Urdu, and by common consent, the most accomplished practitioner of the short story form in South Asia. He wrote short stories, sketches, portraits, essays, screen plays, seven collections of radio plays and a novel.



Born in a typical middle class Muslim family of Samrala, Punjab, to a conservative, domineering father and a gentle mother, he showed no interest in studies at school. Luckily he chanced upon a mentor, Abdul Bari Alig, a dilettante writer and journalist, who introduced him to English, Russian and French writers – Oscar Wilde, Chekhov, Pushkin, Maupassant, Victor Hugo and others.

Saadat Hasan Manto is one of the foremost writers of the Indian subcontinent in Urdu, and by common consent, the most accomplished practitioner of the short story form in South Asia. He wrote short stories, sketches, portraits, essays, screen plays, seven collections of radio plays and a novel.



File: Manto.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: <https://cdn4.static.ovimg.com/m/031zdz/?width=1200&mode=thumb>



Born in a typical middle class Muslim family of Samrala, Punjab, to a conservative, domineering father and a gentle mother, he showed no interest in studies at school. Luckily he chanced upon a mentor, Abdul Bari Alig, a dilettante writer and journalist, who introduced him to English, Russian and French writers – Oscar Wilde, Chekhov, Pushkin, Maupassant, Victor Hugo and others. Manto was so taken up with these writers that he translated Victor Hugo’s The Last Days of a Condemned Man into Urdu, and then Oscar Wilde’s Vera, both the works imbued with revolutionary intent. His apprenticeship as a translator prepared Manto to try his hand at creative writing and he came out with his first story, ‘Tamasha’ which he published under a pseudonym in the journal, Khalq. However, after a series of false starts he really came into his own as a writer after he came to Bombay in 1936 to edit a film magazine, Musawwir.



The film world excited Manto’s imagination and he loved being a part of it. However, he knew that writing for films could not offer him the deep satisfaction of serious literature of lasting impact. He was alive to the changes in literary sensibility following the endeavours of the Progressive Writers Movement, inaugurated by Premchand in 1936. Obscenity charges were leveled against him for his candid treatment of sex and he was tried several times in the court. 

The event that shook Manto’s confidence in himself and in his fellow human beings was the partition of India. His efforts to come to grips with this terrible human tragedy produced stories that looked at the violence, slaughter and savagery of Partition straight in the face without rhetorical consolation. ‘Toba Tek Singh’ has acquired an iconic, almost mythical status as an allegory of the absurdity of shadow line boundaries and phantom borders. ‘Cold Meat’, ‘Open It’ and ‘Saha’e’ depict the unmitigated brutality of partition where neighbours turned against each other, reminding one of Primo Levi’s stark portrayal of the German holocaust. The 32 vignettes under the title, Siyah hashiye (Black Margins) are notable for their macabre humour and subversive intent.



Despite his contempt for politicians Manto was remarkably prescient. In an open letter to Nehru (http://www.urdustudies.com/pdf/11/15pundit.pdf) he spoke about the cavalier way the country was divided, the problems faced by the Kashmiris, the water-dispute between India and Pakistan and the plight of the Urdu language in post-partition India. The post-partition politics of attrition between India and Pakistan has been treated with panache in his story ‘Dog of Tithwal’ where ‘even a dog has to declare whether he is a Pakistani or Hindustani’. In his series of ‘Letters to Uncle Sam’ he figures out the contours of international politics in the context of India-Pakistan hostility.



Discussions of Manto often do not mention his heartwarming wit and humour. This quality lifts his bleak and stark tales from their atmosphere of gloom and makes them invaluable human documents of our times.



Timeline

1912                1933                    1936                      1944                         1948                                    1955

|		|		|		  |		       |			         |

Born         met Bari Alig     Arrival in Bombay   tried for obscenity    Left Bombay for Pakistan   Death

                                                                                   for ‘Boo’



File: 1.jpg

Figure 2. Urdu Original

Source: cannot be found via Google image search!



File: 2.jpg

Figure 3. Manto in English translation

Source: <http://www.logobook.kz/mi/12240752/Bitter_Fruit:_The_Very_Best_of_Saadat_Hasan_

Manto.jpg>



File: 3.jpg

Figure 4. Manto in French translation

Source: <http://pmcdn.priceminister.com/photo/Toba-Tek-Singh---Et-Autres-Nouvelles-Livre-848241563_L.jpg>



Manto’s Works in Original Urdu

Atishparay (Nuggets of Fire), 1936

Manto Ke Afsanay (Stories of Manto), 1940

Dhuan (Smoke), 1941

Afsane Aur Dramay (Fiction and Drama) - 1943

Chughad (Owl), 1948 

Lazzat-e-Sang (The Taste of Rock), 1948

Siyah Hashiye (Black margins),1948

Badshahat Ka Khatimah (The End of Kingship), 1950

Khali Botlein (Empty Bottles), 1950

Nimrud Ki Khudai (Nimrod, The God), 1950

Thanda Gosht (Cold Meat), 1950

Yazid ,1951

Pardey Ke Peechhey (Behind The Curtains), 1953

Sarak Ke Kinarey (By the Roadside), 1953

Baghair Unwan Ke (Without a Title), 1954

Loud Speaker, 1955

Baghair Ijazat (Without Permission), 1955

Burquey, 1955

Phundney (Tassels), 1955

Sarkandon Ke Peechhey (Behind The Reeds),1955

Shaiytan (Satan), 1955

Shikari Auratein (Women On the Prowl), 1955

Ratti, Masha, Tolah, 1956



Manto’s Works in Translation 

Stars from Another Sky: The Bombay Film World of the 1940s, tr. by Khalid Hasan. Delhi: Penguin India, 2000.

For Freedom’s Sake: Saadat Hasan Manto: Stories and Sketches, tr., M Asaduddin. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2001

Bitter Fruit: The Very Best of Saadat Hassan Manto, edited and tr. by Khalid Hassan, Penguin, 2008.

Naked Voices: Stories and Sketches by Manto, Ed. and tr. by Rakhshanda Jalil. Delhi: Indian Ink & Roli Books, 2008.

Toba Tek Singh et autres nouvelles, traduites de l'ourdou (Inde et Pakistan) par Alain Désoulières, Paris Buchet Chastel, 2008

Further reading:

(Bhalla)