
Viviana d'Auria
Department of architecture,urbanism and planning, KU Leuven

Manuel Mujica Milln
(born Vitoria, Spain, 26 May 1897, died Mrida, Venezuela, 13 February1963)

Considered the most significant neo-colonial/ neo-hispanic architect in
Venezuela. In the course of his career the versatile Manuel Mujica Milln
demonstrated a pronounced capacity to reconcile modern design and
functionalist layouts with the revival and reinvention of vernacular forms
and architectural dialects. As part of a larger neo-hispanic awakening,
Mujica Milln found fertile terrain to manifest his eclecticism, stemming
from the appreciation of pre-existing architectural production and the
exigencies of directing future urban development in Venezuela. In the
country as in other areas of the Latin American continent, the wider debate
on national identity embraced that of modernization and the physical
manifestation that overall progress would take not only in the case of new
neighbourhoods and their configuration, but also in that of important state
buildings, public spaces and company headquarters. The assimilation of
nationhood with Venezuelas hispanic roots, namely only one of its many
sources, led to the emergence of a neo-colonial style that found much
fortune in the late 1920s and 1930s in Caracas and was applied to novel
typologies associated with the citys modernization.

Mujica Milln reached Caracas in 1927 after growing up in the Basque city
of Vitoria and completing his architecture studies in Barcelona. He arrived
in Venezuelas capital city two years after having completed his
architectural degree, charged with the task of completing and expanding the
Hotel Majestic. Above all the hotel represented a new type for the city,
and Mujica Milln could give full impetus to a luxurious eclecticism in the
design of its decorated salons, patios and faade. After this first
commission and his intensifying relations with Caracas real estate
developers, the Spanish architect moved on to design prestigious city
extensions (urbanizacines) adhering to garden city principles. In
Barcelona he had already worked on important suburban residential
complexes, an experience which would prove crucial for the articulation of
La Florida, located in the east of Caracas.  The latter, together with the
Country Club urbanizacin developed shortly after, would be the first of
two major ruptures in Caracas colonial grid. In this context, Mujica
Milln would also win the competition for La Floridas clubhouse, again a
new typology for booming Caracas. In the course of this realization he gave
full voice to a neo-hispanic language. As proof of the ambiguities of this
style however, and its ambivalent relation to modernisms radical
approaches to urban development, it proved no problem for its proponents to
accept the demolition of the truly colonial family house of the Buenos the
clubhouse would finally replace.

The 1930s saw the triumph and full diffusion of neo-hispanic architecture
in Venezuela, with Mujica Milln as one of its main disseminators.
Propelled by the fortunes of La Florida and overall modernization impulses
in Caracas, he proposed the radical remodelling of Plaza Bolvar by means
of new tram and railway connections. The cathedral would be renewed as a
neo-baroque temple, the same design Mujica Milln would choose for
reshaping the neo-gothic faade of the National Pantheon.  During this
decade of affirmation for neo-hispanic architecture, the Spanish architect
would continue work on urban extensions and also on the restoration of
colonial villas for important families in Caracas. In all cases he would
masterfully combine modern conceptions with neo-hispanic scenographies,
producing notable spatial effects in the name of transparency, exterior-
interior dialectics and bold split-level configurations. In doing so he
stimulated a novel residential trend, which recovered its colonial memory
by means of a renewed layout and spatial conception far from any prior
traditional arrangements. As a leading and prolific pioneer of this
ambivalent architectural production, Mujica Milln continuously debated and
re-adjusted the boundaries of nationalism, internationalism, sobriety,
ornament, rationalism, modernity and vernacular expressions. By 1945 Mujica
Milln was not only operational in Caracas but in several other cities of
Venezuela including Mrida, where he worked on the reconstruction of the
Cathedral, the Governmental Palace and the University of the Andes.

Figures:

[pic]
Figure 1  Photo portrait of Manuel Mujica Milln (1960)
Source: Juan Jos Perz Rancel, personal archive

[pic]Figure 2  Quinta Casablanca
Source: J. P. Posani, Caracas a travs de su arquitectura, Caracas, 1969.

[pic]
Figure 3  Project for Nuestra Seora del Carmen Chapel
Source: J. P. Posani, Caracas a travs de su arquitectura, Caracas, 1969.

[pic]Figure 4  La  Florida clubhouse (Caracas, 1935)
Source: Juan Jos Perz Rancel, personal archive

[pic]
Figure 5  National Pantheon (Caracas, 1930)
Source: Juan Jos Perz Rancel, personal archive

[pic]
Figure 6  Project for mixed-use building (with Guinand)
Source: J. P. Posani, Caracas a travs de su arquitectura, Caracas, 1969.


Further readings:

Juan Jos Prez Rancel, "La obra de Manuel Mujica Milln y los orgenes del
Neohispanismo en la arquitectura de Venezuela" paper presented at La
Arquitectura de Influencia Espaola en Venezuela, DOCOMOMO-Caracas,
Caracas, 30 March 2011.

Lorenzo Gonzalez Casas  and Henry Vicente Garrido, "Arquitectura
Neocolonial en Venezuela: Discursos Independentistas, Estilos
Arquitectnicos y Patrimonio, XIV Encuentro de Latinoamericanistas
Espanoles, 2010. Available at: <
http://hal.inria.fr/docs/00/53/05/49/PDF/AT7_Gonzalez-Garrido.pdf>
(accessed 31/03/2014)


