

Sophie Maslow, a prolific choreographer and significant contributor to American modern dance, was often characterized as a populist, or people’s choreographer, because she was inspired by the struggles and experiences of ordinary people. Combining modernism with humanism, Maslow’s work depicted emotional and universal experiences (a hallmark of mid-century modern dance) while also envisioning a more just and equitable society. Throughout her more than fifty-year career she drew from a variety of sources, including folk traditions, rural and urban American life, and literature. During the 1930s, while a soloist with the Martha Graham dance company, she began choreographing her own work and joined the New Dance League, the precursor to The New Dance Group, a collective of choreographers who viewed dance as a form of social activism.

Sophie Maslow, a prolific choreographer and significant contributor to American modern dance, was often characterized as a populist, or people’s choreographer, because she was inspired by the struggles and experiences of ordinary people. Combining modernism with humanism, Maslow’s work depicted emotional and universal experiences (a hallmark of mid-century modern dance) while also envisioning a more just and equitable society. Throughout her more than fifty-year career she drew from a variety of sources, including folk traditions, rural and urban American life, and literature. During the 1930s, while a soloist with the Martha Graham dance company, she began choreographing her own work and joined the New Dance League, the precursor to The New Dance Group, a collective of choreographers who viewed dance as a form of social activism. In 1941, she formed the Dudley-Maslow-Bales Trio with Jane Dudley and William Bales, and shortly thereafter, established the Sophie Maslow Dance Company. Her Trio and Company toured throughout the United States and provided Maslow with a platform to create some of her most significant works, including Dust Bowl Ballads (1941) and Folksay (1942) about America’s heartland, and The Village I Knew (1950), which depicted Eastern-European Jewish life. After 1954, Maslow continued to choreograph for the Sophie Maslow Dance Company.



Maslow was born in New York City to working-class, Jewish parents who emigrated from Russia. As a child, she was immersed in a secular, Jewish culture that encouraged intellectual and artistic expression. She began her training at the Neighbourhood Playhouse, studying dance with Blanche Talmud and Martha Graham, and composition with Louis Horst. Maslow was a soloist with the Graham Company between 1931 and 1940. 



During the 1930s, Maslow was affiliated with the New Dance League and the New Dance Group, alongside other (mostly Jewish) dancers, including Miriam Blecher, Nadia Chilkovsky, Jane Dudley, Edith Segal, Anna Sokolow, and Helen Tamiris. Although their styles varied considerably, these women fused modern dance with leftist politics to create a radical form of dance that protested bigotry, capitalism, and fascism. Like her peers, Maslow was interested in the social and political culture in Soviet Russia and performed her first solos about and for working-class, socialist audiences. However, Maslow’s dances emphasized human experiences over politics and offered a refreshing contrast to the strident, sombre work most frequently offered on leftist stages. Thus, critics commented that her two main solos from this period—Themes from a Slavic People (1934) and Two Songs about Lenin (1935)—were poetic and lyrical dances that effectively captured the spirit of ordinary folk. 



Inspired by the unity generated by Second World War, Maslow focused primarily on American life, people, and folkways during the 1940s. Departing from the elitism and abstraction that characterized much modern dance of this era, she aimed to reduce distinctions between audiences and performers and envisioned a more egalitarian America. Indeed, her ensemble (including such notable dancers as Ronne Aul, Donald McKayle, and Pearl Primus) was consistently racially integrated. Her Americana dances effectively operated on two levels: their folksy tenor supported wartime patriotism while simultaneously depicting an American collective that included ethnic and racial minorities. Her two most enduring dances of this period, Dust Bowl Ballads (1941) and Folksay (1942), epitomized the choreographer’s ability to transform American folklore into modern dance. Two solos, set to songs by Woody Gutherie, Dust Bowl Ballads responded to the plight of migrant workers. Folksay was more upbeat. Performed to live music by Guthrie and Earl Robinson, as well as Carl Sandberg’s poem ‘The People, Yes’, the ensemble piece offered a lively fusion of modern dance and American vernacular forms like clogging and square dance. Maslow continued to work in this American mode throughout the 1950s but became more interested in urban figures and styles such as boxing (Champion, 1948), jazz (Manhattan Suite, 1953), and beat poetry (Poem, 1963). During these years Maslow rejected the field’s emphasis on abstraction by freely utilizing speech and poetry in her dances, a choice that in certain ways presaged postmodern dance’s return to text and narrative. 

	

Maslow’s dances always reflected a pluralist and liberal-humanist set of values shared by many American Jews. In response to the Holocaust, however, she began to focus more frequently and openly on Jewish history and culture. For example, she staged numerous works for the annual Chanukah Festivals at Madison Square Garden, an event sponsored by Israel Bonds. Her most famous dance of this period was The Village I Knew (1950), a seven-part suite that enlivened Sholom Aleichem’s stories about Eastern-European shtetl life. In contrast to sections like ‘Sabbath’ and ‘Why is it Thus?’, which translated ritual into clear and poignant gestural patterns, or the dynamic and celebratory ‘Festival’, the dance’s finale, ‘Exodus’, portrayed the despair wrought by persecution and pogroms. Works like The Village I Knew offered a nostalgic depiction of European Jewish life and religious ritual mediated by modernist aesthetics, effectively bridging past and present, old world and new, traditional and modern. 



Selected Works 

	Themes From A Slavic People (1935) 

	Two Songs About Lenin. (1935)

	Dust Bowl Ballads (1941) 

	Folksay (1942). 

	Champion (1948)

	Prologue (1950)

	Four Sonnets (1951)

	The Village I Knew (1950) 

	Manhattan Suite (1953)

	Anniversary (Warsaw Ghetto) (1956) 

	Poem (1963) 

	From the Book of Ruth (1964)

	Raincheck (1966)

	Ladino Suite (1968)

	Neither Rest Nor Harbor (1969)

	Country Music (1971)

	Decathlon Etudes (1976)

	Black Elk Speaks (1978)

	Woody Sez (1980)

	Voices (1980)

	From Louis’ Book (1985)

	

Select Chorography for Theater and Opera

	The Dybbuk (1951) 

	The Shoemaker and the Peddler (1960)

	The Golem (1962)

	The Big Winner (1974)

Further reading:

 (Graff)

(Jackson)

(Jackson, Jewishness and Modern Dance in Sophie Maslow's The Village I Knew) 

(Rossen)



Online Resources

(Harris)



Moving Image Material

(Company E)