
MEKAS, Jonas (24 December 1922, Semenikai, Lithuania -)


Jonas Mekas is a Lithuanian-American filmmaker and poet, who in the wake  of
World War II was forced to immigrate to The United States  in  1949.  He  is
one of the most important directors of the American avant-garde.He is  known
for his intense focus on  memory  and  highly  lyrical  style,  inspired  by
Transcendentalist writers like Emerson and Thoreau. Most of  his  films  can
be read as a sprawling visual diary  or  a  Proustian  project,  painstaking
reassembling and preserving the authors past.

Jonas Mekas contribution to avant-garde cinema  cannot  be  overstated.  In
1954 Jonas and his brother Adolfas founded Film  Culture  (1955-1996)  -  an
influential  magazine  dedicated  to  experimental   cinema,   among   whose
contributors were Manny Farber, Stan  Brakhage,  Andrew  Sarris  and  Rudolf
Arnheim.  In1962.  Mekas,  Shirley  Clarke,  Stan   Brakhage   and   Gregory
Markopoulos  co-founded  The  Film-Makers  Cooperative,  which   eventually
turned into the  Anthology  Film  Archives  -  one  of  the  most  important
repositories of experimental film in the world.

Mekas is also a prolific writer and a Lithuanian  language  poet.  From  the
late 50s to the early 70s,  he  wrote  a  Movie  Journal  column  for  the
Village Voice, which systematically chronicled the creative  fervor  of  the
American experimental film scene (a selection of his  articles  appeared  in
1972 titled Movie Journal: The Rise of a New  American  Cinema,  1959-1972).
He has also published an account of his life as a displaced  person  in  the
wake of World War II (I Had  Nowhere  to  Go,  1991),  as  well  as  several
volumes of memoirs and poems.

Jonas Mekas style and scope as a filmmaker are best summed up by the  title
of his sprawling, five-hour film diary, As I Was Moving  Ahead  Occasionally
I Saw Brief Glimpses of Beauty (2000). Although he has made  some  narrative
features (most notably, The Brig - a 1964 adaptation of the play by  Kenneth
H. Brown), Mekas is primarily a filmmaker with a  profound  Proustian  bent,
interested in the workings of memory, plucking small moments of  beauty  and
grace out of the flow of time. As he says in the introduction to  Chapter  6
of his film diary I am in every image of this film. The only thing is:  you
have to know how to read these images. The desire to  find  beauty  in  the
small and the immediate is reflected in the rapid, flickering  editing  that
characterizes his work. For instance, his films show  images  such  as  cats
slinking  in  a  verdant  garden,  his  old   mother   cooking   in   1972s
Reminiscences of a Journey to Lithuania; his own shadow on the sidewalk,  or
a party in a fancy New York apartment in 1967s  Walden.  The  discontinuous
montage often eschews chronology in favor  of  associative  structures:  for
Mekas film is, in  the  most  literal  sense,  memory  itself,  the  visible
manifestation of moments lost  forever  to  time.  He  has  been  frequently
called an ecstatic filmmaker - David James speaks  of  one  epiphany  after
another (157) in Walden - for his tendency to  focus  on  only  the  joyous
elements of life. Nonetheless, the pain and anguish of a life that was  also
marked by profound loss are always present in the background: in  many  ways
Mekas joyful celebration of these brief glimpses of beauty  can  be  read
as an antidote to the dark pull of nostalgia and melancholy.

Bibliography and further reading:

James, David E., ed. (1992). To Free the Cinema: Jonas  Mekas  and  the  New
York Underground. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mekas, Jonas (1972). Movie Journal: The Rise of a New American Cinema, 1959-
1972. New York: Collier Books.
Silbajoris,Rimvydas (1973). The Reminiscences of Jonas Mekas:  Poetic  Form
and Rooted Sorrow. Journal of Baltic Studies 4, 327-334
Sitney, P. Adams (2008). Eyes Upside  Down:  Visionary  Filmmakers  and  the
Heritage of Emerson. New York: Oxford University Press.
Taubin, Amy (2013). Film as Life: Jonas Mekas. Sight and Sound  23.1,  40-
43.

Filmography:

The Brig (1964)
Walden (1969)
Reminiscences of a Journey to Lithuania (1972)
As I Was Moving Ahead, Occasionally I Saw Brief Moments of Beauty (2000)
Outtakes from the Life of a Happy Man (2012)


Paratextual materials:

http://jonasmekas.com/diary/ - Artists website,  containing  numerous  film
clips, miscellaneous writing and bibliographical information.
http://film-makerscoop.com/about/history  -   A   brief   history   of   the
Filmmakers Cooperrative, written by Mekas.

http://www.nowness.com/day/2012/12/5/2640/a-happy-man--jonas-mekas  -  Brief
fragment from Outtakes from  the  Life  of  a  Happy  Man  -  a  film  which
accompanied  a  major  retrospective  of  his  work  in  London,   for   the
anniversary of his 90th birthday.

Contributor: Maria Ioni
Ryerson University

