
Melodrama
Luis Miguel Garca-Mainar (University of Zaragoza, Spain)

With origins in the novel and the theatre, melodrama appeared in late
eighteenth-century Europe and reached maturity at the turn of the twentieth
century. In the United States, the incipient film industry adopted it as a
vehicle for suspense and action stories aimed at a mass audience. Melodrama
featured a Manichaean world where unquestionably virtuous protagonists had
to endure suffering and defend themselves from the advance of evil, in the
form of utterly villanous antagonists. Of the same family as the biblical
parable, it offered testimonies of moral struggle that have pervaded most
commercial cinema across the worldin France, Italy, Mexico, the Middle
East, and the various Indian industriesyet is best known through its
Hollywood incarnation. Hollywood combined the melodrama with various types
of action films but also developed a distinct version revolving around
domestic conflict and sentimental plots. 1970s film criticism associated
the term with films centered on women and family life, frequently
containing a more or less open critique of dominant gender relations. Key
examples of this type of melodrama are King Vidors Stella Dallas (1937),
Douglas Sirks Written on the Wind (1956) or Vincente Minellis Some Came
Running (1958). Excessive in form and emotions and subtly critical of
social mores, it combined popular appeal and modernist stylization, and
attracted auteurs striving after cultural respectability and commercial
success.

Melodrama and Modernity
The term melodrama first referred to dramas in which the dialogues
emotional content was enhanced by music. It resulted in a form of
entertainment that combined music, dance, drama, and pantomime. Between
1880 and 1920 a more sensational, spectacularly staged melodrama, extremely
popular in American and European popular theatre, was adapted into film
serials. Both stage melodramas of this time and film serials were regarded
low artistic forms that catered to the basic instincts of the masses by
means of suspense and excess. They were products of and reflections on
modernity, with its rapid urbanisation, new means of transport and
communication, and emerging social structures and styles of intimacy.
Melodrama then adopted its characteristic features: dramatic conflict
between good and evil, stock characters (the hero, the heroine, the
villain), a hyperbolic aesthetic, and an episodic swiftly moving plot
(Neale 2000, 196). Some studies have explained it as an allegorical form,
an attempt to unearth a hidden world of moral meaningor moral
occultrepressed by a society that had turned its back on religion after
the Enlightenment and the French Revolution. In this view, melodrama was a
fable about the inevitable conflict between good and evil; it offered
guidance to cope with personal and social dilemmas in a world lacking
ultimate moral guarantees (Brooks 1985, 51-60). Its operating mechanisms
echo Freudian psychology, as melodrama works by displacing emotion and
repressed meanings onto setting and costume, which are to be read as
symptoms of the conflicts that beset characters (Elsaesser 1987, 58-60).

Two Strands of Film Melodrama
Melodrama has always been a diffuse, elusive concept that resists easy
conceptualisation, partly because the term has been used to refer to
different types of films and conventions at different times. To the
mainstream American film industry, it meant stories that featured crime,
violence, tension, moral Manichaeism, and suspense. This use reveals the
connection between nineteenth-century melodrama and Hollywoods genres of
action and suspensehorror films, thrillers, Westerns, war films, and
action-adventure pictures. In this strand of melodramacalled at times
action melodrama (Walker 1982, 16-18)helpless women are often threatened
by men who seduce and abandon them, while male heroes are subject to the
uncertainties of a troubled world. The broad spread of melodramatic
gestures across a variety of films suggests that more than as a genre,
melodrama may be seen as a narrative mode whose conventions underpin many
genres. From this point of view, melodrama is one of the foundational
cinematic modes of the United States, where films have traditionally
exhibited morally charged conflicts with characters seeking to escape
social constrictions (Williams). This notion of melodrama is illustrated by
such classics as Way Down East (D.W. Griffith, 1920), but also by film
noirs such as John Hustons The Maltese Falcon (1941), gangster films such
as Scarface (Howard Hawks, 1932), horror films such as Frankenstein (James
Whale, 1931), or Westerns such as Stagecoach (John Ford, 1939).
      However, melodrama has also come to mean emphasis on heightened
emotionalism and sentimentality, usually in the context of the family. The
family melodrama deals with the process by which characters adjust their
social and sexual profiles to the strict confines of the home; it thus
functions as safety valve for tensions and contradictions arising from sex,
gender roles, and familial relations (Mulvey 1987, 75). Nicholas Rays
Rebel Without a Cause (1955) or Vincente Minnellis The Cobweb (1955), Some
Came Running (1958) and Home from the Hill (1960) are good examples of this
formula. Related to this trend are the melodramas that overlap the category
of the womans film, centred on the struggle of women to reconcile their
sexuality and social ambitions with their roles as wives and mothers. This
is probably the most popular meaning of the genre in the field of film
studies, which has tended to identify melodrama with women and their
concerns. Classic womans films would be Stella Dallas (King Vidor, 1937),
Rebecca (Alfred Hitchcock, 1940), Mildred Pierce (Michael Curtiz, 1945),
Secret Beyond the Door (Fritz Lang, 1947) and The Reckless Moment (Max
Ophls, 1949). Key in this strand of the genre was Douglas Sirk, a German
director who moved to Hollywood in the 1930s to make a series of highly
regarded melodramas in the 1950s. Magnificent Obsession (1954), All that
Heaven Allows (1955), Written on the Wind (1957) and Imitation of Life
(1959) used mise-en-scne (setting, costume and colour) in order to signal
sexual or familial conflict, turning it into a trademark of the genre that
would later be imitated by other filmmakers, such as German director Rainer
W. Fassbinder during the 1970s (http://whitecitycinema.com/tag/all-that-
heaven-allows/).

References and further reading
Brooks, P. (1985) The Melodramatic Imagination, in M. Landy (ed.)
      Imitations of Life: A Reader on Film and Television Melodrama,
      Detroit: Wayne State UP.
Doane, M. A. (1987) The Desire to Desire: The Womans Film of the 1940s,
      Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Elsaesser, T. (1987) Tales of Sound and Fury: Observations on the Family
      Melodrama, in Gledhill (ed.). 43-69.
Gledhill, C. (ed.) (1987) Home Is Where the Heart Is: Studies in Melodrama
      and the Womans Film, London: BFI.
Klinger, B. (1994) Melodrama and Meaning: History, Culture, and the Films
      of Douglas Sirk, Bloomington: Indiana UP.
Mercer, J. and M. Shingler (2004) Melodrama: Genre, Style and Sensibility,
      London: Wallflower P.
Mulvey (1987) Notes on Sirk and Melodrama, in Gledhill. 75-79.
 Neale, S. (2000) Melodrama and the Womans Film, Genre and Hollywood,
      London: Routledge. 179-204.
Singer, B. (2001) Melodrama and Modernity: Early Sensational Cinema and Its
      Contexts, New York: Columbia UP.
Walker, M. (1982) Melodrama and the American Cinema, Movie, 19/30: 2-38.
Williams, L. (2001) Playing the Race Card: Melodramas of Black and White
      from Uncle Tom to O.J. Simpsom, Princeton: Princeton UP.

[pic]
D.W. Griffiths Way Down East (1920)
http://brightlightsfilm.com/63/63_images/63griffith1.jpg

[pic]
Lauren Bacall and Rock Hudson in Douglas Sirks Written on the Wind (1957)
http://www.movingimagesource.us/images/articles/Written-on-the-Wind_2-
      20080812-093909-medium.jpg
