
Austrian Expressionism

Expressionism was one of the foremost modernist movements to emerge in
Europe in the early years of the twentieth-century. It had a profound
effect on the visual arts, as well as on music, dance, drama, literature,
poetry, and cinema. Rather than depict physical reality, Expressionism
developed as a reaction against the prevailing interest in positivism,
naturalism, and Impressionism, as artists who were heavily influenced by
the work of Edvard Munch and Vincent Van Gogh sought to explore subjective
content, finding the visual means to fully evoke or express an emotion,
mood or idea through their artwork.

Austrian Expressionism is primarily associated with the work of EgonGON
SchieleCHIELE and OskarSKAR KokoOKOschkaSCHKA, and also includes the work
of their contemporaries Max Oppenheimer, Richard Gerstl and Alfred Kubin.
For Schiele and Kokoschka, portraiture and figural imagery, often favoring
scenes of heightened sexual tension, were primary subjects as each sought
to delve beneath the surface reality of physical appearance to uncover
psychological or emotional insights in their subjects. Both artists reflect
the importance at the time of the psychological theories of Sigmund Freud,
particularly his On the Interpretation of Dreams, published in 1900. Like
their German counterparts in DieIE BrRckeCKE group, both artists took
inspiration in the authentic and natural behavior of children.

Both artists got their start in Vienna, thanks largely to the support of
GustavUSTAV KlimtLIMT, though their early works generated consternation and
criticism when exhibited. By showing the untidy reality and complexity of
the individual human psyche and the overriding forces of instinct, sexual
desires, and physical or psychological illnesses that control and define a
person, their works posed a direct challenge to the reserved nature of the
Viennese, for whom outward appearances were central to the maintenance of
societal expectations.

Portraits and Self-Portraits
Kokoschka encouraged his subjects to move about freely and behave naturally
as he worked, without the use of preliminary sketches, to uncover the
essence of a sitter. Portrait of Hans and Erika Tietze, 1909, depicts a
married couple, both of whom were respected art historians. Kokoschka
incised directly onto the surface of the canvas to include force lines
emanating from each figure, while adding linear motifs to surround them
with a harmonic assortment of abstract colors and forms. Though
individualized and separated through pose, they are united through the
position of their hands, which creates an arching line across the
foreground of the canvas to pull them together. Kokoschka was influenced by
the development of x-ray technology at the time, a medical tool that
similarly made the internal world outwardly visible.

[pic]

In Portrait of Paris von Gtersloh, 1918, Schieles friend and fellow
artist is rendered in his distinctive, energetic line and the architectural
structure of form found in his paintings. The sitters dominance within the
vibrant orange background, punctuated with jolts of color in the blue tie
and red socks, gives a sense of dynamism and intensity to the figure that
corresponds to his creative identity. In Portrait of Johann Harms, 1916,
Schiele elongates the form of his elderly father-in-law and includes a
resigned gesture that conveys the awareness of deteriorating health and
loss of physical vigor, which is further manifest in the somber, melancholy
palette.

[pic][pic]

Schiele and Kokoschka were aligned in the usefulness of self-portraiture to
study the power of pose, gesture, and facial expression, and throughout
their works, the position of the hands is often central. This is seen in
several examples, including Schieles Self-Portrait, 1910, in which he
assumes a defiant and anti-authoritarian stance to signal his renegade
arrival on an artistic scene that so prized the opposite type of
portraiture, one that conveyed status and social position through objective
details.

[pic][pic]

Kokoschkas early Self-Portrait, 1909, a clay bust, shows the expressionist
interest in surface texture and the intense handling of form, which are
also key elements in Expressionist canvases. In one of his most famous
works, Kokoschka is able to offer insight into his psychological state of
mind during a defining love affair with Alma Mahler. In The Tempest (Bride
of the Wind), 1914, the couple appears within an ethereal realm of color
within an atmospheric landscape. But, the deterioration of their
relationship is signaled by the cool blue tones and through the worrisome
expression on the artists face, matched with the tension of his writhing
hands.

[pic]

Other Art Forms
Kokoschka was the author of several dramatic plays that relied on non-
linear narrative structure and aphoristic content, while Schiele wrote
poetry using alliteration and rhythmic construction to heighten the sensual
descriptiveness of his prose. This literary work is part of the larger
reorganization and regeneration in languages of creative form within
Expressionism. In Vienna, one of the most profound and influential mediums
was music. Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern and Alban Berg experimented with
atonal compositions, harmonic dissonance and strong subjective allusions,
showing the capability of Expressionism to express deep meaning by
transcending existing limitations.


References and further reading:

Vienna 1900: Klimt, Schiele, and their Times, A Total Work of Art, Barbara
Steffen, editor. Basel: Fondation Beyeler and Hatje Cantz Verlag, 2011.

Vienna 1900 and the Heroes of Modernism. Christian Brandsttter, ed. London
and New York: Thames & Hudson, Ltd. and Vendome Press, 2006.

Oskar Kokoschka. Klaus Albrecht Schroder and Johann Winkler, editors.
Munich: Prestel 1991.

Oskar Kokoschka: Early Portraits from Vienna and Berlin, 1909-1914. Exh.
cat. Tobias G. Natter, editor. Cologne: DuMont Verlag and the Neue Galerie
New York, 2002.

Egon Schiele. Exh. cat. Klaus Albrecht Schrder. Vienna and Munich:
Albertina and Prestel Verlag, 2005.

Egon Schiele: The Leopold Collection, Vienna, Magdalena Dabrowski, ed.
(Munich and New York: Prestel, 2009).

Peter Vergo, Art in Vienna 1898-1918: Klimt, Kokoschka, Schiele and their
Contemporaries. (London: Phaidon, 1981).

Van Gogh and Expressionism, Jill Lloyd, editor. Ostfildern and London:
Hatje Cantz, 2006.

Vienna 1890-1920, Robert Waissenberger, editor. New York: Rizzoli, 1984.

