
Czech Avant-Garde Photography

Early 20th century Czech photography  with few exceptions  lagged behind
the development of contemporary modern art. There had been small changes
after World War I when some photographers enriched their work with
influences of Futurism, Expressionism and Cubism: Frantiek Drtikol came to
his own version of Art deco and his student Jaroslav Rssler used Cubist
morphology in his photographs at the beginning of the 1920s. An essential
impetus to shift to the principles of modern photography was an exhibition
of Alfred Stieglitz and Clarence H. White held in Prague in 1921 and an
example of the work of Czech-American amateur photographer Drahomr Josef
Rika. After 1920 Czech photographers began to respond to the stimulus of
abstract art. Abstract compositions appeared in the works of Drtikol and
Rssler. Rsslers work from 192325 (photographs of moving lights and
geometric compositions) aligns him to worlds leading pioneers of abstract
photography. In the second half of the 1920s a photographic cycle entitled
Abstraktn fota  Kompozice (Abstract Photos: Compositions) was created by
Jaromr Funke. Inspired by Cubism he initially photographed glass and paper
geometric shapes and gradually became more and more interested in their
shadows; finally he extruded the objects outside the photos and depicted
only nonfigurative shadow play.

Rssler was a member of Devtsil, an association of Czech avant-garde
artists that declared photography and film successor of traditional art.
Photography played a significant role in the new expressive forms of
Devtsil artists, among then so-called picture poems with which Karel
Teige realized the interrelation of poetry and visual art. Devtsils
members such as Jindich tyrsk, Toyen, Josef ma, Teige, Rssler and
other created poetistic collages combining fragment photos, typography,
drawing and other artifacts in simple geometric compositions. A synthesis
of contemporary efforts was achieved in Vtzslav Nezvals poetry
collection Abeceda (Alphabet, 1926) with photographs of the dancer Mila
Mayerov who performed individual letters of the alphabet in a
constructivist layout by Teige.

German avant-garde, especially the Bauhaus, had great influence upon Czech
photography in the 1920s and 1930s. There were many connections between the
Bauhaus and photographers in Czechoslovakia: some of them studied at the
Bauhaus (e.g. Jindich/Heinrich Koch, later leader of the photography
department of the Kunstgewerbeschule at Burg Giebichenstein near Halle;
photographer Zdenk Rossmann and his wife Marie Rossmannov; or Slovak
organizer of social documentary photography movement Irena Blhov) and
photographers living in Germany maintained contact with the Czech avant-
garde (Lszl Moholy-Nagy) or their works were published in Czech avant-
garde journals (e. g. Albert Renger-Patzsch, Aenne Biermann). A
participation of Czechs in the Film und Foto exhibition in Stuttgart in
1929 and familiarization with works of other exhibited authors also played
a key role.

An influence of German photography in conjunction with knowledge of Russian
Constructivism resulted in the use of New Vision principles in Czech
photography. The first images in the spirit of constructivism  photographs
and photomontages with the subject of the Eiffel Tower in Paris and the
Petn View Tower in Prague in diagonal compositions  were made by Rssler
starting in 1926. Funke and Vladimr Hipman explored in their works the
beauty of industrial objects and buildings. Prominent representatives of
the New Vision photography were also Josef Sudek, Alexander Hackenschmied
(after his emigration to the US known as Hammid), Ladislav Emil Berka,
Eugen Wikovsk and Karel Kapak, as well as some German authors living
in Czechoslovakia, among them Heinrich Wicpalek and Grete Popper. A number
of examples of technically perfect images of various materials were
published in the book Fotografie vid povrch (Photography Sees the Surface,
1935) edited by Funke and Ladislav Sutnar with photographs of students of
the Pragues State School of Graphics, one of the most important
educational institutions in the field of applied photography at that time.
The principles of New Vision found their application in a wide range of
professional advertising photography on the one hand and amateur
photography on the other.

The amateur photography movement had a large membership in interwar
Czechoslovakia. There existed a dense network of amateur clubs, whose
members published their works in numerous magazines devoted to amateur
photography and display them at exhibitions. Authors such as Jan
Lauschmann, Ji Jenek, Pemysl Koblic and Josef Voek were among the
most progressive amateur photographers.

Economic growth in the 1920s and an increasing number of popular
periodicals were a stimulus for development of advertising photography.
Sudek with his photographs for the publishing house Drustevn prce and
its sample shop for prints and objects of industrial design Krsn jizba,
Rssler with Parisian advertising photographs from the late 1920s  and
early 1930s, Zdenk Rosmann and Jindich/Heinrich Koch were the leading
exponents of this type of photography in Czechoslovakia.

From the 1920s social themes appeared in genre photographs of Funke, Sudek,
Adolf Schneeberger, Pemysl Koblic, Vclav Jr and others. In the first
half of the 1930s, due to the Great Depression, the leftist movement of
social documentary photography became stronger; it was inspired
particularly by the so-called German workers photography and the magazines
Arbeiter Illustrierte Zeitung and Der Arbeiter Fotograf. The leader of the
movement was Lubomr Linhart, its protagonists included Oldich Straka,
Karel Kapak, Tibor Honty, Ladislav Sitensk, Karel Hjek and Vclav
Jr. Eighty large-format collages Sociologick fragment bydlen (A
Sociological Fragment of Housing, 19321933) by an architect Ji Kroha
pointing to disproportion of life of different social classes occupies a
distinctive position in the context of the Czech social documentary
photography.

The 1920s and 1930s were also a booming time for photojournalism. In the
1920s  documentary photographs appeared mostly in newspapers; in the 1930s
the number of vogue society magazines increased wherein comprehensive
photo essays were published. An example of such a journal was Pestr tden
with a versatile in-house photographer Bohumil astn. Karel Hjek,
working for the magazines of the Melantrich publishing house, became a real
star of Czech reportage photography of the 1930s. Agencies such as
Centropress and Press Photo Service earned an important place in the photo
news service.

From the 1930s surrealist tendencies were very strong in Czech photography.
Several members of the Surrealist Group of Czechoslovakia were intensively
engaged in photography. For example tyrsk, a key figure of Czech
Surrealism, photographed shop windows and signboards, cemeteries or cracked
and defaced walls. He created cycles of non-manipulated photographs ab
mu, Mu s klapkami na och and Pask odpoledne (Frogman, Man with
Blinkers, Paris Afternoon, 19341935) which depicted random encounters of
banal objects in unusual constellations. A motif of blending of sex and
death is relatively frequent in his photographs. In 1932 he published
Emilie pichz ke m ve snu (Emily Comes to Me in a Dream) with daring
erotic collages in which he used fragments of old pornographic photographs
in new contexts. Similarly, from 1935, Teige created an extensive set of
collages with frequent erotic subtext, in which he often used details of
photographs of well-known creators such as Karl Blossfeld, Man Ray, Lszl
Moholy-Nagy, Funke or Miroslav Hk. Frantiek Vobeck, who photographed his
own assemblages created just for this occasion, worked outside the
Surrealist Group of Czechoslovakia.



References and further reading

Comprehensive Studies

    - Birgus, Vladimr. Czech Photographic Avant-Garde 19181948. Prague
      2002.

    - Greenberg, Howard, Kicken, Annette and Kicken, Rudolf. Czech Vision:
      Avant-Garde Photography in Czechoslovakia. Ostfildern 2007.



 Monographs

    - Birgus, Vladimr and Mloch, Jan, eds. Jaroslav Rssler: Czech Avant-
      Garde Photographer. Cambridge, Mass. 2004.

    - Birgus, Vladimr. The Photographer Frantiek Drtikol. Prague 2000.

    - Dufek, Antonn. Jaromr Funke. Prague 2003.

    - Frov, Anna. Josef Sudek. Munich 1999.

    - Srp, Karel. Jindich tyrsk. Prague 2001.

    - Srp, Karel. Karel Teige. Prague 2001.



 Thematic Essays

    - Birgus, Vladimr and Mloch, Jan. The Nude in the Czech Photography.
      Prague 2000.

    - Toman, Jindich. Photo/montage in Print. Prague 2009.



Suggested  Images

Drtikol, Wave, 1925:
http://flann4.files.wordpress.com/2008/04/d9f4687f_drtikol-vlna1926-
19271.jpg

Rssler, Petn Tower, 1926: http://www.school-
portal.co.uk/platforms/21311/51933/CustomPages/163860/88536_original.jpg



