Modernist Shakespearean Cinema: 

SUMMARY:

From the moment of its birth cinema generated its own forms of Shakespeare. About 400 Shakespearean films were produced in the period of silent cinema, even though many of these were just a few minute long charades dealing with significant scenes from his plays. Shakespearean films were produced and shown both in Europe and the US. The film d’art and film d’arte movements promoted Shakespeare in France and Italy. The talkies in the 1920s gave a new life to the Shakespearean text by taking up the challenges of its language. A series of influential talkies were made in the 1930s, but Laurence Olivier’s Modernist films were perhaps the first to capture the magic of Shakespearean drama on screen. Olivier’s Henry V (1944) is influenced by the formidable Modernist filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein, while his Hamlet (1948) uses impressionistic visuals to compliment his Freudian reading of the play. Orson Welles’s Macbeth and Othello are heavily influenced by German Expressionism. Akira Kurosawa’s Throne of Blood (1957) combines Noh theatre and cinema to situate Macbeth in Medieval Japan. Grigori Kozintsev’s uses Modernist film styles in Hamlet (1964) and King Lear (1970) to comment on the political realities of Russia. 

MAIN ENTRY:

Early Shakespearean films were 5-10 minutes long charades dealing with key scenes from his famous plays. About 400 films were adapted from Shakespeare’s plays during the period of the silent cinema from late 1890s to early 1920s. In 1899 William Kennedy-Laurie Dickson shot a four-minute scene from King John featuring the noted actor Sir Herbert Beerbhom Tree. The next Shakespearean film, shown at the 1900 Paris exhibition (produced by The Phono-Cinéma-Théâtre), was a duel scene from Hamlet (1900) with Sarah Bernhardt as the Prince fighting Laertes (Pierre Magnier). It was a film with sound recorded on cylinders for phonograph accompaniment. Bernhardt’s Hamlet and Tree’s King John initiated the evolution of Shakespeare from theatre into film. After Tree’s version of The Tempest (1907) about 50 one-reel films were produced mainly by the Vitagraph and Thanhouser companies in the United States between 1908 and 1911. Noted British films of the period are Will Barker’s Hamlet (1910) made in a single day. In 1911 Sir Frank Benson’s stage productions of Richard III, Macbeth, and The Taming of the Shrew were all recorded. James Keane’s The Life and Death of King Richard III (1912), the first Shakespeare feature film, was shot entirely in medium and long shots, and placed Richard in the center of several interior tableaux.

The film d’art and film d’arte movements promoted Shakespeare in both France and Italy. The French filmmaker Georges Méliès, the inventor of trick photography, made a ten-minute version of Hamlet in which he played the lead role, and also made a film on Shakespeare Writing Julius Caesar in 1907. Jean Monet Sully, one of the greatest French actors of the period, recorded the graveyard scene from Hamlet, and his brother Paul Monet appeared in a one-reel version of Macbeth in 1909-10. Italy produced a series of films such as Romeo and Juliet, Hamlet, Julius Caesar, Othello and Macbeth in 1908-09. Italy’s senior director Enrico’s Guazzoni’s Brutus (1910) was praised for its action scenes. Svend Gade and Heinz Schall directed the path-breaking Hamlet: The Drama of Vengeance (1920) in which the Danish Actress Asta Nielsen’s played the character of Hamlet as a woman disguised as a man. A notable German film of the period is Peter Paul Felner’s The Merchant of Venice (1923), which combines Shakespeare’s text with Giovanni’s Fiorentino’s fourteenth-century novella II Pecorone, one of Shakespeare’s main sources. Another unorthodox version was the German Midsummer Night’s Dream (1925) directed by Hans Neumann, which was “forbidden for juveniles” by the censors due to the heightened element of lust and the Rabelaisian nature of the film. Dimitri Buchowetzki’s German Othello (1922), which draws on Shakespeare’s principal source Cinthio’s Hecatommithi, was also released in an American version and ended up being a box-office hit in New York City. 

Bernard Shaw in the World Film News (November, 1936) observed that “Shakespeare’s language is to a great extent a dead language,” but he observed that the medium of cinema could rejuvenate it. The challenges posed by the Shakespearean verse were taken up with the arrival of sound in cinema, and Sam Taylor’s The Taming of the Shrew (1929) became the first Shakespearean taking picture. The first influential talkie in Hollywood was jointly directed by the noted German stage director Max Reinhardt and his fellow German refugee film director William Dieterle for Warner Bros. in 1935. The star-studded production took liberties with the text, played with the order of the scenes. It was praised for replacing Shakespeare’s poetry with visual equivalents, but it was not a commercial success. 

George Cukor’s extravagant Romeo and Juliet (1936) also failed at using the medium of cinema to capture the magic of the play. It was Laurence Olivier who fully realized the potential of the film medium by playing the title role and directing Henry V (1944), the first commercially successful Shakespearean film. Olivier’s Henry V merges three different historical moments by beginning the film in Shakespeare’s London, then moving back to Henry V’s time in the early fifteenth century, and returning in the end to the twentieth-century Globe theatre, which comments on the contemporary World War II period in Europe. Olivier’s Freudian adaptation of Hamlet (1948) is complemented by impressionistic black and white visuals, which are combined with deep focus photography. The Freudian adaptation of the play was influenced by Ernest Jones’s essay on Hamlet’s character first published in 1910. 

Olivier’s American counterpart Orson Welles’s Macbeth’s (1948) stylization is highly influenced by German Expressionism and echoes Robert Wiene’s The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1919).  Welles makes an extensive use of Christian and Pagan symbolism, by adding the character of a priest, and makes the Witches construct a clay image of a baby, a symbol used throughout the film. The chiaroscuro lighting of German expressionism, along with compositional patterns influenced by Eisenstein’s Alexander Nevsky (1938) is employed consistently in the film. Some critics praised the film’s cinematography, while many criticized it for its badly spoken verse. Welles’s Othello (1952), which won the Palme d’or, was also influenced by Eisenstein’s use of montage, since the film successfully brings together bits and pieces of the play and reworks them into a mosaic, a sort of a variation of the jigszaw puzzle trope used repeatedly by him in Citizen Kane earlier. 

Sergei Yutkevitch’s Russian Othello (1955) is also known for its effective use of montage. Grigori Kozintsev’s Hamlet (1964) is generally read as a political allegory, since the despotic Claudius can be equated to Stalin, who at the end is replaced by the liberal Fortinbras/Khruschev. Kozintsev retained several actors from his Leningrad Hamlet staged in 1954, and created an epic that portrays Hamlet’s belief that “Denmark’s a prison”. Fluid camera movement, images of stormy clouds and crushing waves convey Hamlet’s mental turmoil. The film anticipates Kozintsev’s King Lear (1970), another Soviet epic, which was also influenced by his stage adaptation of the play in 1941. Akira Kurosawa’s Throne of Blood (1957) is one of the most powerful adaptations of Shakespeare’s Macbeth, which mingles Japanese Noh theatre with cinema to situate the film in medieval Japan. Kurosawa’s use of Macbeth’s imagery to capture the spirit of the play demonstrates the effortless transformation of the text into a film script. 

References and further reading: 

Crowl, Samuel. (2008) Shakespeare and Film: A Norton Guide, New York: Norton.

Burt, Richard. (2007) Shakespeares after Shakespeare: An Encyclopedia of the Bard in Mass 

Media and Popular Culture. 2 Vols. Greenwood: Westport.

Jackson, Russell. Ed. (2000) The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Film. London: 

Cambridge UP.

Manvell, Roger. (1979) Shakespeare and the Film. New York: AS Barnes and Company.

Rosenthan, Daniel. (2007) 100 Shakespeare Films. London: British Film Institute/

Rothwell, Kenneth S. (1999) A History of Shakespeare on Screen. London: Cambridge UP.

Selected Films:

The Taming of the Shrew, (1929), featuring Douglas Fairbanks and Mary Pickford.

Romeo and Juliet, (1935). Directed by George Cukor.

A Midsummer Night's Dream, (1935). Directed by Max Reinhardt and William Dieterle.

Henry V, (1945). Directed by Laurence Olivier.

Macbeth, (1948). Directed by Orson Welles (War of the Worlds, Animal Farm, 1984).

Hamlet, (1948). Directed. by Laurence Olivier.

Othello, (1952). Directed by Orson Welles.

Julius Caesar, (1953). Directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz.

Romeo and Juliet, (1954). Directed by Renato Castellani.

Richard III, (1955). Directed by Laurence Olivier.

Othello, (1956). Directed by Sergei Jutkevitsh.

Forbidden Planet (based on The Tempest), (1956). Directed by Fred M. Wilcox.

Throne of Blood / The Castle of the Spider's Web / Cobweb Castle (1957), (derived from Macbeth). Directed by Akira Kurosawa.

The Tempest (1960), (TV) starring Richard Burton. Directed by George Schaefer.

Hamlet (1964), starring Richard Burton. Directed by Bill Colleran and John Gielgud.

Hamlet, (1964), directed by Grigori Kozintsev.

The Taming of the Shrew, (1967), starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. Directed by Franco Zeffirelli

Romeo and Juliet, (1968), directed by Franco Zeffirelli.

King Lear, (1970), directed by Peter Brook.

King Lear, (1970), directed by Grigori Kozintsev.



Paratextual Material:

(Please visit the website of Folger library for information about Shakespearean cinema)

Folger Shakespeare Library: https://www.folger.edu/

Folger Library Link- Laurence Olivier’s Henry V- http://www.folger.edu/imgcolldtl.cfm?imageid=603

Laurence Olivier: Biography: http://www.biography.com/people/laurence-olivier-9428279#awesm=~oCQo57Ecm1e19L

Filming Shakespeare: http://filmingshakespeare.com/

Absolute Shakespeare: http://absoluteshakespeare.com/trivia/films/films.htm