

Modotti, Tina (1895-1942)	

Assunta Adelaide Luigia Modotti Mondini 	

Tina Modotti, an Italian-born photographer who lived much of her life in the United States, was an actress in silent movies in Hollywood, and in Los Angeles joined a Bohemian circle that included photographer Edward Weston, who would become her lover. Together they moved to Mexico, where she worked as a photographer from 1923 to 1930; her career there, though brief, was highly influential. She and Weston acquainted themselves with the artists and writers of Mexico City, presented exhibitions, made portraits and photographed the works of the muralists. Her early photographs, such as Roses (1924), were influenced by Weston, but she combined his formalism with her leftist inclinations, creating images such as Worker Reading El Machete (1925), or Campesinos Reading El Machete (1929), which used contrasts of light and shadow and geometric design to deliver political messages. In 1929 Modotti’s companion at the time, Julio Antonio Mella, was murdered and she was accused of complicity in the crime. Although exonerated, she was charged with the attempted assassination of President-Elect Pascual Ortiz Rubio and deported in 1930. She lived in Moscow from 1930 to 1936, and worked as a nurse in Spain during the Spanish Civil War. After the war, she returned to Mexico and lived quietly until her death in 1942.

Tina Modotti, an Italian-born photographer who lived much of her life in the United States, was an actress in silent movies in Hollywood, and in Los Angeles joined a Bohemian circle that included photographer Edward Weston, who would become her lover. Together they moved to Mexico, where she worked as a photographer from 1923 to 1930; her career there, though brief, was highly influential. She and Weston acquainted themselves with the artists and writers of Mexico City, presented exhibitions, made portraits and photographed the works of the muralists. Her early photographs, such as Roses (1924), were influenced by Weston, but she combined his formalism with her leftist inclinations, creating images such as Worker Reading El Machete (1925), or Campesinos Reading El Machete (1929), which used contrasts of light and shadow and geometric design to deliver political messages. In 1929 Modotti’s companion at the time, Julio Antonio Mella, was murdered and she was accused of complicity in the crime. Although exonerated, she was charged with the attempted assassination of President-Elect Pascual Ortiz Rubio and deported in 1930. She lived in Moscow from 1930 to 1936, and worked as a nurse in Spain during the Spanish Civil War. After the war, she returned to Mexico and lived quietly until her death in 1942.



Modotti was born in a working-class family in Udine, Italy and worked in a factory as a child. Her father immigrated to San Francisco, and the family followed him there. Modotti acted in the Italian community’s amateur theatre before moving to Los Angeles where she had roles in several silent films and worked as an artists’ model. She lived with the aspiring poet Roubaix "Robo" de l'Abrie Richey as his unwedded wife, and they became involved in the local arts community. Modotti illustrated handmade books of Richey’s poetry and made batik clothing, as well as her own costumes for the films she acted in. Richey went to Mexico at the invitation of his friend Ricardo Gómez Robelo at the end of 1921. This was at the beginning of the Mexican artistic renaissance of the 1920s, when North Americans were flocking to Mexico, drawn by the artistic activity there. Although Modotti had already begun an affair with Weston, she went to Mexico to join Richey, who died, presumably of smallpox, while she was on her way. She went back to California when she found she had experienced a second loss with the death of her father, but was determined to return again to Mexico. In 1923 she and Weston, along with his son Chandler, moved to Mexico City and established a home and studio, with the agreement that Modotti would act as Weston’s darkroom assistant and business manager in return for photographic instruction. They soon immersed themselves in Mexico City’s dynamic arts scene, and photographed people and places nearby. Modotti modelled for Weston in portraits and nude studies, and she posed for Diego Rivera, appearing in two of his murals. They received commissions to document murals by Rivera and José Clemente Orozco, among others, and were asked to provide illustrations for the book Idols Behind Altars by Anita Brenner, for which they travelled throughout Central Mexico, photographing people, churches, ruins and folk art. Modotti began to photograph women and children in such intimate images as Baby Nursing (1926-27) at this time. 



Gradually, however, Weston and Modotti grew apart, and she became more involved in Mexican politics; they parted in 1926 when Weston returned to California. Modotti stayed in Mexico City, and began to work for the Communist newspaper El Machete. During this time, she was also involved with the avant-garde Stridentist Movement, contributing images to their publications. Many of her photographs from 1926-1930 symbolise her political values. Her 1927 series of still-life photographs are especially striking; she photographed groups of objects to represent the Mexican Revolution and the concept of revolution in general. Bandolier, Corn, Guitar (1927), for example, combines three essential elements of Mexican culture that also symbolise the “Revolutionary Trinity” that Rivera and others used to represent the Mexican Revolution.



 Fig.1: Modotti, Bandolier, Corn, Guitar 1927.

http://www.masters-of-photography.com/M/modotti/modotti_bandolier_full.html



Modotti was involved with muralist Xavier Guerrero until his departure for the Soviet Union, and then fell in love with the Cuban Communist activist Julio Antonio Mella, who also worked for El Machete. Her 1928 portrait of Mella presents him as an heroic figure; her Mella’s Typewriter of 1928 is a metaphoric portrait, alluding to the absent Mella, and emphasizing the technological modernism of the machine and the importance of revolutionary texts.



In 1929, Mella was gunned down at Modotti’s side while they walked home together; she was arrested and interrogated and the press attacked her mercilessly. She was released and continued to work, travelling to Tehuantepec and photographing women and children there. In 1929 she held a retrospective exhibition at the National Library. She wrote a manifesto about her work for the show, in which she upheld the political uses of photography as “social production.” However, in 1930 Modotti was deported from Mexico on trumped up charges. Giving up photography, she travelled to the Soviet Union, and worked for the Russian Red Aid (equivalent to the Red Cross). In 1936 she travelled to Spain, where she was a nurse during the Spanish Civil War. She returned to Mexico in 1939, but did not resume an active photographic career there. She died suddenly in 1942. 

List of Photographic Works:

Bandolier, Corn, Guitar (1927)

Baby Nursing, (1926-27)

Campesinos Reading El Machete (1929)

Hands Resting on Tool (1927) 

Mella’s Typewriter (1929)

Worker Reading El Machete (1925)

Workers’ Parade (1926)

Further reading:

(Albers)



(Argenteri)



(Cacucci)



(Constantine)



(Hooks)



(Lowe)



(Modotti)



(Noble)



(Poniatowska)



(Jean Michel Place Editions)