
Routledge Encyclopaedia of Modernism Entry

Dorothy Price

Moholy, Lucia (1894-1989)
Lucia Moholy (ne Schulz) was born to Jewish parents in Prague. In 1912 she
worked as an English teacher and translator whilst also studying Art
History and Philosophy at the University of Prague. In 1915 she left Prague
for Germany where she worked as an editor and a lecturer in Wiesbaden and
Leipzig. In 1920 she moved to Berlin where she met her future husband,
Hungarian artist Lszl Moholy-Nagy whom she married in 1921. In 1923
Lszl Moholy-Nagy was appointed to the Bauhaus by Walter Gropius and the
couple moved from Berlin to Weimar. It was during their Bauhaus years from
1923 to 1928 that the Moholy-Nagys established new vision photography as
one of the most innovative and experimental areas of Bauhaus practice.  In
1929 they participated in the famous Film und Foto exhibition in Stuttgart
before their divorce in the same year. With the rise of National Socialism
in 1933, Lucia was forced to leave Berlin, emigrating first to Prague, then
Paris and finally arriving in London in 1934. She was awarded British
citizenship in 1947 and died in Switzerland in 1989.

Lucia Moholys modernism was consolidated at the Bauhaus in partnership
with her husband. Although photography was never a formal workshop, it
attracted an enthusiastic following under the couples guidance. They
became advocates of experimental photographic techniques, which they taught
to a subsequent generation of new photographers. Unusual camera angles,
sophisticated darkroom techniques, experimental photograms playing with the
possibilities of light, multiple exposures, combi-phots and detailed
close-ups that were tantalisingly fresh, constituted the new vision in
which photography became the expressive vehicle of the future. Smaller
cameras and faster exposures provided increased dexterity, enabling them to
keep time with the energetic pace of modern life. Unencumbered by the
structured expectations of a formal course, photography was practiced as
the best sort of experimental play. It particularly attracted female
students frustrated by the lack of opportunities elsewhere. One of Lucia
Moholys enduring legacies from this period is undoubtedly her series of
iconic architectural photographs of Bauhaus buildings, specifically Dresden
and Berlin and her meticulous documentary photographs of objects and
furniture without which knowledge of the significance of Bauhaus design
would have been lost after the Second World war. During her enforced exile
from Germany she stored her glass plate negative archive with the Gropiuss
who, unknown to her, shipped it to the USA with their own belongings. In
the years that followed she believed that her five or six hundred negatives
had been lost. She therefore had no evidence of her seminal Bauhaus years
from which she could build a new practice in England. Penniless and with no
belongings she was forced to begin anew, establishing herself as a London
society portrait photographer. During this period she also published A
Hundred Years of Photography (1939). In 1957, after three years of legal
negotiations, she retrieved some of her negatives from the Gropiuss. In
1959 she moved to Switzerland, settling in Zollikon, just outside Zurich
where she continued working as a freelance art critic and photographer.
Further Reading
Moholy, Lucia A Hundred Years of Photography London: Penguin 1939
Sachsse, Rolf Lucia Moholy Dsseldorf: Edition Marzona, 1985

[pic]

Image: Lucia Moholy Bauhaus Dessau (Workshop Buildings from the Southwest),
1925-26

(available: http://www.thehistoryvault.co.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2014/01/Bauhaus0101.jpg)


