
Montale, Eugenio (1896-1981)
Elena Fabietti

Eugenio Montale is one of the most influential Italian poets of the
twentieth century. In the Italian poetic tradition, Montale marks a
fundamental departure from symbolist as well as avant-garde practices,
thereby sharply distinguishing his poetics from that of the other key
Italian figure of the century, Giuseppe Ungaretti. Through an approach that
problematizes the poetic heritage, Montales conception of language
stresses its autonomy and non-immediacy, ultimately its incapacity to give
expression to the inner and outer worlds. The existential commitment of his
poetry likewise consists in the corrosion of firm, absolute, and
unquestioned certainties. The pervasive presence in his poetry of an
interlocutor, a you (tu) expresses the lack of confidence in the
knowledge accessible to the I. Among the favorite themes of Montales
poetry are situations and objects from daily life, which a skeptical
attitude always interrogates about the meaning of human existence, in a
continuous effort to achieve knowledge, common also to metaphysical poetry.
Similar to T.S. Eliot, the language of Montales poetry largely draws from
prosaic materials and seeks to find the source of epiphanic revelations in
daily concrete objects, as in the works of Virginia Woolf or James Joyce.

The first years. Ossi di seppia
Born in Genoa in 1896 and mostly self-educated in literature, music, and
art, Montale published his first book of poems, Ossi di seppia (Cuttlefish
Bones), in 1925, the same year that saw the appearance of the antifascist
manifesto written by Benedetto Croce and subscribed to by Montale among
many other Italian intellectuals. In 1928, a second edition gave the book
its definitive shape. Ossi di seppia brings the humble objects of the
desiccated landscape of the Ligurian shore onto the page, in sharp contrast
to the decadent poetics of sublime objects exemplified by the poetry of
Gabriele DAnnunzio. Instead of the resonant symbols of the decadent
tradition, language here names its objects concretely, precisely and even
technically (with regard to this defiance of the poetic tradition see
especially the first poem of the collection, I Limoni [The Lemons], and
the first of the subsection Ossi di seppia, Non chiederci la parola
[Dont ask me for words]). The language of Italian poetic heritage, from
Dante to Leopardi, is instead employed together with that of daily life to
generate an estranging, modern and yet classical mixture of registers. The
key notion of the book is male di vivere (evil of living), the
suffering intrinsic to natural life, which is tied to the representation of
the immobile canicule of the Ligurian summer (see Meriggiare pallido e
assorto [To laze at noon, pale and thoughtful], and Spesso il male di
vivere ho incontrato [I have often met the evil of living]). Against the
coastal Ligurian scenario, the subject of the poems establishes an
existential interrogation directed towards the bare essence (hence the
bones of the title) and final meaning of the objects surrounding him, yet
never retrieving a transcendent meaning to their existence.

In 1926, Montale met some key-figures for his intellectual life, such as
the novelist Italo Svevo, the poet Umberto Saba, and Ezra Pound, who will
become important subjects for his early activity as a literary critic.


The Florence years. Le occasioni
At the end of the twenties, Montale moved to culturally prominent Florence
where he held intellectual employments, first for the publisher Bemporad,
later as director of the cultural association Gabinetto Vieusseux. In
Florence he also met the American scholar  Irma Brandeis, who then fled the
country under racial laws in 1938, and his future wife, Drusilla Tanzi, to
whom he gave the nickname Mosca. Both women left a strong mark on his
poetry.

Montales second book, Le occasioni (1939, The Occasions; second edition
1940), was written during this decade. Occasions mainly refers to those
memories that trigger a recollection of the past and an interrogation of
its meaning. Places, memories and even simple objects can initiate the
poetic flow, constituting what has been called the poetics of the object,
a phrase often used to generically define Montales poetry as a whole. This
poetic tendency has often been associated with the objective correlative
practiced by T.S. Eliot, in whose journal Criterion a poem from the book
Ossi di seppia, Arsenio, was translated in 1928. The poems of Occasioni
are strongly centered on a female interlocutor, who can either be a woman
from Montales life, or a more abstract subject, as in the subsection
Mottetti. In both cases, the figure is invested with an almost angelic and
salvific power. These interlocutors are involved in an interrogation that
addresses objects and memories ready to reveal a sudden, blazing, yet
insufficient truth. Looking for signs able to disclose deeper meanings, the
existential investigation deployed in these poems can aspire at best to
retrieve the fading images of the past and only the truth of its
disappearance (see for example the poem La casa dei doganieri [The
Coastguard Station]).

In the course of the thirties, being openly antifascist, Montale lost his
job as director of the Vieusseux cultural association, and thereafter lived
from scattered, though numerous, collaborations as a critic and translator.
During WWII, he was discharged from military and briefly engaged in
political activism in the post-war years. But his skepticism towards
parties and faiths kept him away from further commitments. Montales
intellectual profile was always largely independent from mainstream Italian
culture, and he preferred to embrace an aspiration to a highly critical,
liberal, secular, bourgeois European culture.

The Milan years. La bufera e altro; Satura
In 1948 Montale moved to Milan upon being hired by the main Italian
newspaper Corriere della Sera, where he published critical pieces as well
as reportage from his travels, music reviews, and short stories. His
literary prose was later collected in La farfalla di Dinard (1956; 1960;
The Butterfly of Dinard), while his articles and essays were published in
Auto da F (1966).

His third book of poetry, La bufera e altro (1956, Storm and Other Things)
gathered poems from several years, stretching from the war (in particular
the section Finisterre) to the fifties. History enters these poems
strongly, in the stormy manner evoked by the title. The addressee of the
poems is again a female figure, this time more undefined, blurred and
transfigured than in the previous book. Clizia, biographically identified
with the American scholar Irma Brandeis, to whom he had already dedicated
his previous poetry book, is the angelical and salvific presence of many of
the poems, her name borrowed from Dantes reference to an Ovidian nymph.
The other female addressees in the book include the poets mother (A mia
madre), Mosca (Montales wife), and, in the last section of the book,
Volpe (the poet Maria Luisa Spaziani, whom Montale met in 1949). The figure
of Volpe counterweighs the angelic aura of Clizia with a terrestrial, more
concrete biographical presence (see in particular the poem Se thanno
assomigliato [If they have likened you]).

In the years after the publication of La bufera, Montale was mostly
committed to journalism and prose. The death of his wife in 1963 marked a
significant transition in his biography that carries its traces in the book
of poems with which Montale returned to poetry: Satura (1971). Two of the
sections of the book, entitled Xenia I and II, are dedicated to the
affectionate memory of Mosca. The tone of the book is disengaged and low,
almost conversational, while parody and irony also play an essential role.
A central theme of this collection is the polemical critique of
contemporary life and political jargon, against which Montale opposes an
acutely skeptical and cynical voice, often criticized as conservative.

[pic]
Montale on his terrace in Milan, 1966
(http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/news-photo/eugenio-montale-italian-poet-
journalist-and-music-critic-on-news-photo/141554241)

Montales last poetic production follows along the lines of Satura, making
vast use of irony and parody. In 1973 he publishes Diario del 71 e del 72
(Diary of 1971 and 1972), which displays an increasingly prosaic tone, with
strong recourse to the logics of doubt and paradox, and to a permanent
demystification of commonplaces and spiritual assumptions. In a poem such
as Lettera a Malvolio (Letter to Malvolio), his poetry engages in a
stark cultural critique of political Italian style, while carving out a
distanced, almost alienated position for the poet.

Montale remained poetically productive for the whole decade of the
Seventies, publishing Diario di quattro anni in 1977 and Altri versi in
1980 (published in the critical edition of the complete works), books in
which polemical and ironical accents became all the more pronounced. The
authorship of the poems in the posthumous publication Diario Postumo (1991;
1996) remains controversial until today.

Montale was awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Literature, and died in Milan
in 1981.

Collections
Montale, E. (1980), Opera in versi. Torino: Einaudi.
Montale, E. (1984), Tutte le poesie. Milano: Mondadori.
Montale, E. (1995), Prose e racconti. Milano: Mondadori.

Translations
Montale, E. (2012), The Collected Poems of Eugenio Montale 1925-1977.
Translated by William Arrowsmith. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Montale, E. (1998), Collected poems, 1920-1954. Translated and annotated by
Jonathan Galassi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Montale, E. (1971), Butterfly of Dinard. Lexington: University Press of
Kentucky.

Further readings
Blasucci, L. (2002), Gli oggetti di Montale. Bologna: il Mulino.
Cambon, G. (1982), Eugenio Montales Poetry. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Contini, G. (1974), Una lunga fedelt. Scritti su Eugenio Montale. Torino:
Einaudi.
Greco, L., ed. (1980), Montale commenta Montale. Parma: Pratiche.
Huffman, C. de (1983), Montale and the Occasions of Poetry. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Mengaldo, P.V. (2000), Lopera in versi di Eugenio Montale, in La
tradizione del Novecento. Quarta serie, pp. 66-120. Torino: Bollati
Boringhieri.

External links
A television documentary from 1999 containing fragments from interviews,
readings from Montales poems by himself, and miscellaneous information:
http://www.raiscuola.rai.it/articoli/eugenio-montale-i-maestri-del-
novecento-parte-prima/3227/default.aspx

Another short documentary realized for TV by Giuseppe Bertolucci:
http://www.lastoriasiamonoi.rai.it/puntata.aspx?id=288
