

Murakami, Saburo (1925-1966)

村上三郎

Saburo Murakami was a member of Group Zero in Japan. This collective was founded by Akira Kanayama, Kazuo Shiraga and Atsuko Tanaka in 1952, but was merged with Gutai in 1955. Murakami took up training under Tsuguro Itoh in 1949, but was also an avid student of philosophy and aesthetics. His paintings – large-scale tactile colour-field pictures with paint, plaster and resin peeling, splashed, scraped or dripped, like Sakuhin, (1959) – attest to the sway of a theatrical abstraction or Art Informel in post-war Japan. However, Murakami is better known for his ‘paper-breakthrough’ happenings, like At One Moment Opening Six Holes (1955), which saw the artist noisily strike, burst or hurl himself through large tautly-stretched paper screens, sometimes arranged serially.

Saburo Murakami was a member of Group Zero in Japan. This collective was founded by Akira Kanayama, Kazuo Shiraga and Atsuko Tanaka in 1952, but was merged with Gutai in 1955. Murakami took up training under Tsuguro Itoh in 1949, but was also an avid student of philosophy and aesthetics. His paintings – large-scale tactile colour-field pictures with paint, plaster and resin peeling, splashed, scraped or dripped, like Sakuhin, (1959) – attest to the sway of a theatrical abstraction or Art Informel in post-war Japan. However, Murakami is better known for his ‘paper-breakthrough’ happenings, like At One Moment Opening Six Holes (1955), which saw the artist noisily strike, burst or hurl himself through large tautly-stretched paper screens, sometimes arranged serially. These were performed at Gutai exhibitions, and documented with photography. The screens were then displayed as works. Such ephemeral events made use of the materials of everyday life and ignored divisions between the media. They also underscored the importance of chance, process, temporality, duration and experience in the art of Gutai. If the body was already present in Murakami’s highly gestural painting, it was even more palpable here, in actions that resemble the more innocent creative expression of children, and communicate a primal violence or spontaneity.

Further reading:

(Tiampo)

(Yoshinori and Murakami)