Navya (Kannada)

Nikhila H.



Literally meaning ‘of the new’, Navya refers to the modernist phase in Kannada literature which began in the 1950s and ran its course by 1980. Vinayaka Krishna Gokak’s poetry collection entitled Navya Kavitegalu (New Poems) published in 1950 was the Kannada response to the English modernist poets’ injunction to “make it new”.  While Gokak is recognized as bringing in newness in form, Gopalakrishna Adiga is credited with bringing novelty in theme and content. As against the romanticism of the Navodaya writers, Navya writing is characterized by disillusionment (the failed promise of Nehru), biting sarcasm against encrusted tradition and restless quest for meaning and values in the present. In contrast to the popularity of Pragatisheela (progressive) writers, Navya writers worked through complex images and motifs that required the mediation of literary critics and scholars to unravel the meanings. Beginning in poetry, Navya concerns manifested themselves in other genres as well. In Karnataka, U.R. Ananthamurthy, P.Lankesh, Purnachandra Tejaswi, Chandrashekara Kambar among others, while Girish Karnad, Ramachandra Sharma, K.V. Tirumalesh,  A.K. Ramanujan, Shantinath Desai and others who were settlers outside Karnataka or itinerants, were participants in this literary movement. The socialist ideology of Lohia gave a societal dimension to the individualism and existentialist preoccupations of many Navya writers. The critique of morality staged in their writing through transgressions provided themes and stories for the emerging New Wave cinema in Kannada. While many of the Navya writers were teachers of English, some of them were also involved in various aspects of film-making.

Timeline

1950 – Coining of the term ‘Navyate’ in a Kannada Conference by Gokak

1950 – Publication of Navya kavitegalu by Gokak 

1954 – Publication of Chandemaddale, a collection of poems by Gopalkrishna Adiga

1961 – Publication of Mukti, novel by Shantinath Desai

1964 – Publication of Tughlaq, play by Girish Karnad

1965 – Publication of Samskara, novel by U.R. Ananthamurthy 

1967 – Publication of Biruku, novel by P. Lankesh

1973 – Publication of short story collection Abachurina Postoffice, by Purnachandra Tejaswi 



Selected Navya works available in English translation

Samskara: A Rite for a Dead Man novel by U.R. Ananthamurthy (Translated by A.K. Ramanujan – 1978)

Gendethimma novel by Srikrishna Alanahally (Translated by P.P. Giridhar – 1999)

Selected Poems by Gopalkrishna Adiga (Translated by Sumatheendra Nadig – 2005)

Om Namo novel by Shantinath Desai (Translated by G.S. Amur – 2008)

Yayati a play by Girish Karnad (Translated by Girish Karnad – 2008)

Bharathipura novel by U.R. Ananthamurthy (Traslated by Susheela Punitha – 2010)

The Avatars of Bhujangaiah novel by Srikrishna Alanahalli (Translated by C.P. Ravichandra – 2010)



References:

Tharakeshwar V.B. “Sahitya Chaluvali” in Samakaaleena Karnataka Charitreya Vividha Aayamagalu (Kannada) Ed. in Kanaja Internet Encyclopedia http://kanaja.in/kannada/