

The literary and cultural movement known as négritude was begun in Paris in 1932 by black students from French-speaking colonies in West Africa, the Caribbean, and South America. The word négritude, which literally means ‘negro-ness’, expresses the value and depth of black culture and history, as opposed to European, particularly French, culture. Its aesthetics drew from other black-centric movements of the period, including the Harlem Renaissance in the United States. The most prominent authors associated with négritude were Léopold Sédar Senghor (of Senegal), Léon Damas (of French Guiana), Aimé Césaire (of Martinique), and Birago Diop (of Senegal), who wrote literature and political treatises that influenced their contemporaries, as well as postcolonial writers. Some of the movement’s founding members, including Césaire and Senghor, held political offices in their newly independent states in the post-World War II period.

The literary and cultural movement known as négritude was begun in Paris in 1932 by black students from French-speaking colonies in West Africa, the Caribbean, and South America. The word négritude, which literally means ‘negro-ness’, expresses the value and depth of black culture and history, as opposed to European, particularly French, culture. Its aesthetics drew from other black-centric movements of the period, including the Harlem Renaissance in the United States. The most prominent authors associated with négritude were Léopold Sédar Senghor (of Senegal), Léon Damas (of French Guiana), Aimé Césaire (of Martinique), and Birago Diop (of Senegal), who wrote literature and political treatises that influenced their contemporaries, as well as postcolonial writers. Some of the movement’s founding members, including Césaire and Senghor, held political offices in their newly independent states in the post-World War II period.



Négritude’s foundations were deeply political. Though the word ‘négritude’ was not used, the ideas propelling the movement were first articulated in the short-lived journal Légitime Défense (1932) [Rightful vindication, or Legitimate defence], which West Indian students published to assert their opposition to French assimilationist policies. Such policies mandated that colonial subjects should abandon their cultures of origin and acquire French language and cultural mores, thereby elevating French culture above those of their colonies. The writers rejected capitalism and Christianity; they took instead surrealism and communism as their inspirations for a new African-focused movement, which was influenced by the writings Freud, Marx, Rimbaud, and Breton (Kesteloot 15). Légitime Défense was succeeded by L’Étudiant Noir (1934–1936; founded by Senghor, Damas, and Césaire). While Légitime Défense was political in tone, the writings in L’Étudiant Noir focused instead on finding ‘a single mystique for the entire black race’ (Kennedy xvii). The textual and visual evidence of this search would shape discussions of négritude (and garner its most vehement criticism) until the movement dissipated in the 1950s.



The first published usage of the term ‘négritude’ is found in Césaire’s Cahier d’un retour au pays natal (1939; Return to My Native Land, 1968), but definitions and mode of expression varied by author and by decade. Senghor once defined négritude as ‘the cultural patrimony, the values, and above all the spirit of Negro African civilization’ (Kesteloot 102). Césaire, on the other hand, once put it as ‘the awareness of being black, the simple acknowledgment of a fact which implies the acceptance of it, a taking charge of one’s destiny as a black man, of one’s history and culture’ (Kesteloot). Senghor’s poetry in particular communicated these values and this spirit via a glorification of those aspects of African culture that were most often dismissed by the West as ‘backward’ or ‘uncivilized.’ Senghor often foregrounded imagery of the black body, precolonial traditions and religion, traditional dance and instruments, and the African (or Caribbean) landscape. Senghor’s poem, ‘Black Woman’, epitomizes the aesthetic of négritude, with its metaphor of black woman as Africa, the erotic beauty of her black skin, and its formal and textual emphasis on the rhythm and musicality of Africa. Césaire’s interpretation and expression of négritude in his surrealist poetry and Marxist political treatises varies most widely from that of Senghor, since his writings focus less on traditional African cultures and more on colonial and postcolonial historical conditions. 



A later generation of postcolonial writers rejected négritude because of its lack of political exigency — most notably, Wole Soyinka, who famously wrote that ‘the tiger does not proclaim his tigritude — he pounces.’ In spite of Soyinka’s criticism, the writings of négritude authors continue to influence discussions of ‘blackness’ in postcolonial literature and criticism.

Further reading:

 (Kennedy)

(Kesteloot)