
Neo-Primitivism (Russian: Neo-primitivizm)
[pic]
http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/larionov-soldier-on-a-horse-t0076
Mikhail Larionov: Soldier on a Horse, c.1912, Oil on canvas, 87x99cm.
Collection: Tate Modern, London.
Image and reproduction rights need to be sought from Tate Modern in London.
Copyright needs to be sought from ADAGP in Paris, or DACS (representing
ADAGP in the UK) or ARS (representing ADAGP in the USA).

A style-label employed by the Muscovite avant-garde in the early 20th
century to describe forms of visual art and poetry that were tendentiously
crude in style and socially and politically contentious in terms of subject
matter. In the field of painting the style was chiefly developed by MIKHAIL
LARIONOV and NATALIA GONCHAROVA as well as by members of the Donkeys Tail
and Target groups of which they were the leaders. In poetry Neo-primitivism
was most consistently explored by Velimir Khlebnikov (1885-1922)  and
Alexei Kruchenykh (1886-1968), with whom the painters frequently
collaborated. Neo-primitivism was not only oppositional to the polite and
refined culture of the status-quo but also intensely nationalistic, seeing
itself as the inheritor of indigenous artistic practices that had been
erased under the Westernising reforms of Peter the Great. Whilst initially
inspired by Western avant-garde modernism, the Neo-primitives quickly
disassociated themselves from Western practices to find inspiration in the
soil of Russia. Their aim was to reinvigorate Russian art by reference to
the expressive qualities of icon painitng, the lubok (Russian woodcut
print), peasant embroidery, the painted tray and signboard, and the ancient
Russian fertility statutes found in the steppe landscape.

The style originated in 1909 with works such as LARIONOVS Walk in a
Provincial Town (Moscow: Tretiakov Gallery), a scathing lubok-style parody
of middle-class manners, and a series of down-to-earth peasant paintings by
GONCHAROVA such as Planting Potatoes (Paris: Muse National dArt Moderne).
These works were characterized by a laconic use of line, strong colouring,
flatened picture spaces, stylized forms and an expressive sense of texture
(faktura), the latter being identified as the key characteristic of the
Russian folk art tradition as well as a weapon against the polished
surfaces of Academic painting and, metaphorically, the polished culture
of the middle-class. The style blossomed duirng 1910-1912 with an extensive
series of Soldier paintings by Larionov which explored the gritty and
vulgar life of the squaddie in the barracks, a series of controversial
Venus paintings on the theme of contemporary prostitution, as well as a
series entitled The Seasons (Paris: Muse National dArt Moderne & Moscow:
Tretiakov Gallery), a celebration of Russian peasant life and folk belief,
which synthesised the style of the icon, lubok, signboard, peasant
embroidery, graffiti and the primitive art of the Siberian shamans.


Neo-primitivism found its most diverse and striking expression in the work
of Goncharova. Her paintings on the theme of the Russian peasantry, such as
Washing Linen (Moscow: Tretiakov Gallery) and Bread-Seller (Paris: Muse
National dArt Moderne), address the plight of working women both in the
countryside and in the new urban centres, whilst a series of paintings
entitled Jews explore the difficulties of the ethnic minorities in the pale
of settlement. In addition Goncharova executed a large number of religious
works in the style of the old Russian icons and church frescos. Seen as an
attack on the Orthodox establishment, because of their coarse treatment and
expressive textures, works such as The Evangelists (St. Petersburg: Russian
Museum) were removed from exhibition by the Public Censor. During 1911
Goncharova increasingly employed allegory in her Neo-primitive work and
this is especially noticeable in The Harvest and The Vintage  series
(Paris: Muse national dArt Moderne; Moscow: Tretiakov Gallery et al.)
which narrate an apocalyptic judgement against her society.

KAZIMIR MALEVICH was also a key exponent of Neo-primitivism. The gauche
colour, strong texture, ungainly forms and apparently careless execution,
seen in works such as Floor Polishers of 1911 (Amsterdam: Stedelijk
Museum), is typical of the style. Other pratitioners included Alexander
Shevchenko (1883-1848), who published a manifesto entitled Neo-primitivism
in November 1913, David Burliuk (1882-1967), Vladimir Burliuk (1886-1917),
Pavel Filonov (1883-1941) and, for a short while, VLADIMIR TATLIN. In the
field of Neo-primitive poetry Alexei Kruchenykh and Velimir Khlebnikov both
investigated the expressive possibilities of the primitive word. Inspired
by the glossolalia of shamans and religious dissenters, they dispensed with
syntax, rhyme and punctuation, and wrote a substantial body of poetry on
primitive themes in a stream of consciousness style. These Neo-primitive
poems were published in the form of lubok-style books that were illustrated
by the artists. Key examples include A Game in Hell (Igra v adu),
illustrated by Goncharova, and World Backwards (Mir s kontsa), illustrated
by Goncharova, Larionov, Tatlin and others.

Neo-primitive painting shared much in common with the work of DIE BRCKE
but was distinctive in its appeal to the national spirit and in its genuine
attempt to define a form of modern Russian art that was grounded in
indigenous traditions. In stylistic terms it was the most radical of the
expressionist traditions existing in European art in the years before the
First World War and in poetry its emphasis on discovering the expressive
quality of pure sound, divorced from meaning, prepared the way for the
development of the Russian Formalist school.

Reading

Bowlt, J., Misler, N. & Petrova, E. (2013), The Russian Avant-Garde,
Siberia and the East: Kandinsky, Malevich, Filonov, Goncharova. Firenze:
Palazzo Strozzi

Compton, S. (1978), The World Backwards: Russian Futurist Books 1912-1916.
London: British Library

Eganbiuri, Eli (1913), Natalia Goncharova. Mikhail Larionov, Moscow:
Miunster.

Parton, A. (1993), Mikhail Larionov and the Russian Avant-Garde, Princeton
/ London: Princeton University Press / Thames & Hudson

Parton, A. (2010), Goncharova: The Art and Design of Natalia Goncharova,
Woodbridge, UK: Antique Collectors Club

Sharp, J.A. (2006), Russian Modernism between East and West: Natalia
Goncharova and the Moscow Avant-Garde, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press

Shevchenko, A. (1912), Neo-primtivizm, Moscow: Izd. Avtora. Translated into
English in Bowlt, J. Russian Art of the Avant-garde: Theory and Criticism
1902-1934, New York: Viking Press, pp. 41-54

Warren, Sarah (2013): Mikhail Larionov and the Cultural Politics of Late
Imperial Russia, Farnham (UK): Ashgate


Electronic Sources
Kramer, C. (2002):  Natalia Goncharova: Her Depiction of Jews in Early
20th Century Russia, in Womans Art Journal, Vol. 23, No. 1, Spring-
Summer, 2002, pp. 17-23
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/1358963

Warren, S. (2003), Spent Gypsies and Fallen Venuses: Mikhail Larionov's
Modernist Primitivism, in Oxford Art Journal Vol. 26, No. 1, 2003, pp.  25-
44. (Available via pay site):
http://oaj.oxfordjournals.org/content/26/1/25.full.pdf

