


New American Cinema

Laura E. B. Key (University of Liverpool)

The New American Cinema was a movement to create independent films that
expressed the countercultural moods and sensibilities of the late 1950s and
early 1960s; these films represented a break away from the standardisation
and conformity of corporate Hollywood and from the ideological conservatism
of the American mainstream. The term refers both to the films of the period
and to the independent film distribution collective of the same name which
was established in New York by some New American Cinema filmmakers.



The two earliest examples of New American Cinema are John Cassavetes
Shadows (1959) and Robert Frank and Alfred Leslies Pull My Daisy (1959).
These films were noted for their improvisational style, their social
commentary and their involvement with countercultural movements such as the
Beat Generation and the subculture of jazz musicians. The films produced
under the umbrella of the New American Cinema differ in style of
production, scripting, and storyline; common characteristics were the
attempt to establish film as art rather than purely as entertainment (Grant
2008) and the understanding of the cinema as a means of personal
expression, emphasising in particular the directors creative freedom.
Further attributes these films often shared were politically radical plots,
the lack of a set script, the use of location shooting, taboo imagery,
often of a sexual character and with homosexual and camp inflections, and
an unpolished style of editing. Budgets tended to be low and the actors
were often unknown beyond their immediate artistic circle. New American
Cinema directors believed that anyone could direct or appear in a film and
that film production should not be restricted to an elite group of
Hollywood filmmakers and stars.



The New American Cinema project was formalised in 1960, when twenty-three
independent filmmakers, led by Jonas Mekas and including Shirley Clarke,
Stan Brakhage, Gregory Markopoulos, Robert Frank and Alfred Leslie, banded
together to form the New American Cinema Group, and founded the Film-
Makers Co-operative as the distributing arm of the movement, an
organisation that exists to this day. The original aim of this group was to
showcase independent cinema and to create a community of like-minded
people, allowing independent films to be shared widely both nationally and
internationally. By 1962, it had become the main experimental and
independent film distributor in North America. It differed from other
distribution houses in that it was run by the filmmakers themselves and had
a non-selective policy: all films submitted for distribution were accepted
(James 1992).



In the twenty-first century, the New American Cinema Group, or Film-makers
Co-operative, continues to ensure that non-commercial films are still
produced and distributed in the US and beyond. The Co-op holds a collection
of over 5,000 films by more than 825 filmmakers which it rents out to
various arts festivals and cultural institutions, making it an important
archive for American Cinema (http://film-makerscoop.com/). The group has
inspired similar local and national organisations such as the London Film-
makers Co-operative in England the New Brunswick Filmmakers Co-operative
in Canada.



References and Further Reading



Battcock, G. (1967) The New American Cinema: A Critical Anthology. New
York, N.Y.: E. P. Dutton and Co.

Grant, B. K. (2008) Introduction. In American Cinema of the 1960s, ed. B.
K. Grant (pp. 1-21 [18]), New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.



James, D. E. (1992) Introduction. In To Free the Cinema: Jonas Mekas and
the New York Underground, ed. D. E. James (pp. 3-17 [10]), Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.



Lewis, J. (ed.) (1998) The New American Cinema. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.

Mekas, J. (date unknown) The Film-Makers Co-operative: A Brief History,
<http://film-makerscoop.com/about/history>, date accessed: 3rd January,
2014.



Ruoff, J. K. (1991) Home Movies of the Avant-Garde: Jonas Mekas and the
New York Art World, Cinema Journal vol. 30 (3): 6-28.

Zryd, M. (2006) The Academy and the Avant-Garde: A Relationship of
Dependence and Resistance, Cinema Journal vol. 45 (2): 17-42.

<http://film-makerscoop.com/>, date accessed: 3rd January 2014.




