

Over the course of November 1918, Germany’s political system changed from a constitutional monarchy to a parliamentary republic. The November Revolution was a consequence of the military defeat of the German Empire in the First World War and was triggered by the naval mutiny on October 29, 1918. Soldiers and workers throughout the Empire joined the movement, which turned into an open revolution and was headed by the two social democratic parties, the Majority Social Democrats Party (Mehrheitssozialdemokratische Partei) or MSPD (later the Social Democratic Party [Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands] or SPD) and the more socialist leaning Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (Unabhängige Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands) or USPD.

Over the course of November 1918, Germany’s political system changed from a constitutional monarchy to a parliamentary republic. The November Revolution was a consequence of the military defeat of the German Empire in the First World War and was triggered by the naval mutiny on October 29, 1918. Soldiers and workers throughout the Empire joined the movement, which turned into an open revolution and was headed by the two social democratic parties, the Majority Social Democrats Party (Mehrheitssozialdemokratische Partei) or MSPD (later the Social Democratic Party [Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands] or SPD) and the more socialist leaning Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (Unabhängige Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands) or USPD. On November 9, 1918, the situation threatened to escalate. To prevent political turmoil, Prince Maximilian of Baden (1867–1929) announced the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II (1859–1941) and handed his powers as chancellor over to Friedrich Ebert (MSPD, 1871–1925). Philipp Scheidemann (MSPD, 1865–1939) proclaimed a parliamentary republic a few hours before Karl Liebknecht (USPD, 1871–1919) proclaimed the ‘Free Socialist Republic’. In the face of numerous challenges such as the repatriation of troops and the provision of food supplies, the new government, consisting of members of both social democratic parties, opted for cooperation with the old power brokers of the Empire. However, the majority of military officers, police, judiciary, administration and civil servants did not support the democratic turn; their lack of support proved a heavy burden for the new Weimar Republic. 

Further reading:

(Kolb)

(Lee)

(Ullrich)

(Winkler)