

The Nsukka School, which is named after the University of Nigeria at Nsukka, was a group of artists and faculty members associated with the use of uli—a form of body and mural decorative painting indigenous to the Igbo culture of Nigeria—in their work and are considered disciples of Uche Okeke’s teachings and artistic influence. The Uli experiment sought to address Okeke’s call for ‘natural synthesis’ in the visual arts of Nigeria and the formation of an art appropriate for the post-Independence age. Other members of the group who experimented with uli forms through painting and drawing were Chike Aniakor and Obiora Udechukwu, followed by their students Tayo Adenaike and Olu Oguibe.

The Nsukka School, which is named after the University of Nigeria at Nsukka, was a group of artists and faculty members associated with the use of uli—a form of body and mural decorative painting indigenous to the Igbo culture of Nigeria—in their work and are considered disciples of Uche Okeke’s teachings and artistic influence. The Uli experiment sought to address Okeke’s call for ‘natural synthesis’ in the visual arts of Nigeria and the formation of an art appropriate for the post-Independence age. Other members of the group who experimented with uli forms through painting and drawing were Chike Aniakor and Obiora Udechukwu, followed by their students Tayo Adenaike and Olu Oguibe. Exploring the concept of ‘natural synthesis’ and that of sankofa from Ghana, El Anatsui is credited with translating the group’s conceptual and visual interests into sculptural form when he joined the faculty in 1975. Anatsui began by experimenting in cement and later moved on to wood using both uli and forms from his native Ghana for inspiration. He has since gained international recognition for his metallic tapestries made of locally sourced, discarded liquor bottle caps.



Artists of the Nsukka School helped shape modern Nigerian art in the 1970’s and continue to redefine the artistic landscape of Nigeria through new generations of artists whose training emphasizes both technical skills and critical approaches.

Further reading:

(Ikwuemesi, Adewunmi and Adewunmi)

(Ottenberg)