

Nuevo cine cubano

New Cuban Cinema

Nuevo Cine Cubano refers to the post-revolutionary Cuban cinema that emerged in the years immediately following Fidel Castro’s rise to power.  In March of 1959, various filmmakers and politicians (Alfredo Guevara, Julio García Espinosa, and Santiago Álvarez, among others) helped found the Cuban Institute of Cinematographic Art and Industry (ICAIC), the cinematic production and distribution arm of the revolutionary government whose main purpose was to utilize film as a means of mass communication and mobilisation. While Cuban films produced before the revolution were of little aesthetic or critical import, ICAIC immediately began turning out works with significant social, political, and artistic value. 1960s Cuba witnessed a unique convergence of artistic and ideological avant-gardism, and while other areas of cultural expression suffered under strict vigilance from the Regime’s hardliners, filmmakers enjoyed a relative degree of autonomy thanks to the efforts of, among others, Alfredo Guevara (then the president of ICAIC). The cinema became a space of open critical engagement with revolutionary policies while it acted as a means of celebrating and capitalising on the newly acquired cultural literacy of the Cuban people.  



Nuevo Cine Cubano refers to the post-revolutionary Cuban cinema that emerged in the years immediately following Fidel Castro’s rise to power.  In March of 1959, various filmmakers and politicians (Alfredo Guevara, Julio García Espinosa, and Santiago Álvarez, among others) helped found the Cuban Institute of Cinematographic Art and Industry (ICAIC), the cinematic production and distribution arm of the revolutionary government whose main purpose was to utilize film as a means of mass communication and mobilisation. While Cuban films produced before the revolution were of little aesthetic or critical import, ICAIC immediately began turning out works with significant social, political, and artistic value. 1960s Cuba witnessed a unique convergence of artistic and ideological avant-gardism, and while other areas of cultural expression suffered under strict vigilance from the Regime’s hardliners, filmmakers enjoyed a relative degree of autonomy thanks to the efforts of, among others, Alfredo Guevara (then the president of ICAIC). The cinema became a space of open critical engagement with revolutionary policies while it acted as a means of celebrating and capitalising on the newly acquired cultural literacy of the Cuban people.  



At the time of ICAIC’s formation, Cuba’s two most important figures were Julio García Espinosa and Tomás Gutiérrez Alea. Both had developed a penchant for neorealism while studying at Rome’s famous Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografía.  After codirecting the documentary short Esta tierra nuestra in 1959, the two would shape the development of Nuevo cine cubano in the years to come. Although García continued to direct, his most important contribution came in the form of a 1968 manifesto, For an Imperfect Cinema, in which he argued that the flaws of low-budget but socio-politically urgent films were preferable to the high-cost gloss of the hegemonic Hollywood output.  Gutiérrez Alea, meanwhile, would become Cuba’s greatest filmmaker. His ability to both critique and embrace the revolutionary policies in works such as Muerte de un burócrata (1966), Memorias del subdesarrollo (1968), and La última cena (1976) ensured his widespread popularity amongst the general public and even with Castro himself. 



Most filmmakers trained at ICAIC cut their teeth making documentaries, a form Alfredo Guevara adamantly promoted as a means of informing the masses of social realities. Now (1965) by Santiago Álvarez is often considered the first video clip in history, while his later documentaries, such as Hasta la victoria siempre (1967) and LBJ (1968) represent Cuban cinema as much as the feature films of Gutiérrez or Humberto Solás (Lucía, 1968). After the first decade of Communist rule revolutionary zeal settled into ideological normalcy and many filmmakers turned their attention to historical films that avoided controversial subject matter. Among these were La odisea del General José (Jorge Fraga, 1967) and Páginas del diario de José Martí (José Massip, 1971).  Contemporary subjects also surfaced in El otro Francisco (Sergio Giral, 1974), which deconstructs Cuba’s history of slavery, and in two films that raised consciousness of Cuban women’s double oppression: De cierta manera (Sara Gómez, 1977) and Retrato de Teresa (Pastor Vega, 1979). ICAIC helped to establish the International Festival of Latin American Cinema in 1979, held each December in Havana, which continues to demonstrate the Cuban government’s commitment to film as an integral cultural and political means of expression. 



Further reading:

 (Adelman)

(Chanan)



Filmography:    

(Gutiérrez Alea)

(Gutiérrez Alea, Historias de la revolución Tomás Gutiérrez Alea)

(Gutiérrez Alea, La doce sillas).  

(Álvarez)

(T. Gutiérrez Alea) 

(Álvarez, Hasta la victoria siempre)

(Fraga)

(García Espinosa)

(Álvarez, LBJ)

(Solás)

(T. Gutiérrez Alea, Memorias del subdesarrollo )

(Massip)

(Giral) 

(T. Gutiérrez Alea, La última cena)

(Gómez)

(Vega)