
Odets, Clifford (1906-1963)

One of the foremost American playwrights of the first half of the twentieth
century, Clifford Odets is best known for his social realist plays and
screenplays, of which Waiting for Lefty (1935), Awake and Sing! (1935),
Golden Boy (1937), and Rocket to the Moon (1938) have attained canonical
status. A committed leftist and briefly a member of the Communist Party,
his meteoric trajectory from actor in the experimental Group Theatre in New
York to Hollywood screenwriter has been narrated, first by Harold Clurman
in The Fervent Years and then by generations of subsequent critics and
biographers, as the tragedy of a tormented and politically ambivalent
visionary who struggled to reconcile his radical beliefs with the rapid
celebrity that took him to Hollywood. During his later life, his reputation
was tainted as a result of his voluntary if ambivalent testimony before the
House Un-American Activities Committee in the McCarthy inquisitions.

Odetss importance to theatrical modernism rests on his first play Waiting
for Lefty, which enacted the cultural politics of the Popular Front by
absorbing the militancy of agitprop in the social humanism of dramatic
realism. The play begins as a strike meeting of a taxi drivers union, and
the agitprop narrative frame leads to short realist scenes that flash to
the moments that radicalized the workers. The play ends with a mass
exhortation that famously brought the audience to its feet to join the call
to strike. As Michael Denning suggests, the opening of play, as text and
event, in January 1935 announced the arrival of the cultural front as a
mass movement of radical democracy. As Odets himself rhapsodized after the
first production, The proscenium arch disappeared. Thats the touchstone,
the key phrase: the proscenium arch disappeared (qtd. in Brenman-Gibson
316). In their respective writings on the play, John Howard Lawson and
Harold Clurman both used it to map the political urgency of workers
theatre onto the domain of dramatic literature in the canonical tradition
of American drama. In the year following its premiere, Odets excised the
most explicitly communist scene and the play was taken up by workers
theatre troupes around the world, for whom it provided a theatrical
transition from agitprop to the realist drama of the professionalized
Popular Front theatres.

List of Works

Odets, Clifford. (1939) Six Plays of Clifford Odets, New York: Modern
Library.

----- (1935) Waiting For Lefty, New Theatre (Feb.): 13-20.

----- (1935) Three Plays, New York: Random House.


        References and Further Reading


Brenman-Gibson, Margaret. (1981) Clifford Odets: American Playwright, New
York: Atheneum.

Clurman, Harold. (1964) The Fervent Years, New York: Hill & Wang.

Denning, Michael. (1996) The Cultural Front: The Laboring of American
Culture in the
Twentieth Century, London: Verso.
Lawson, John Howard. (1960) Theory and Technique of Playwriting, New York:
Hill & Wang.

Levine, Ira A. (1985) Left-Wing Dramatic Theory in the American Theatre,
Ann Arbor: UMI.

Alan Filewod, University of Guelph


Recommended Illustrations

[pic]

Clifford Odets, 1935.
[Source: http://acertaincinema.com/media-tags/clifford-odets/ ]

[pic]

The first publication of Waiting for Lefty in New Theatre, Feb. 1935: 13-
20.
[L.W. Conolly Theatre Archives, McLaughlin Library, University of Guelph]


[pic]

Waiting for Lefty as staged by Vancouvers Progressive Arts Club at the
Dominion Drama Festival, Ottawa, 1936.
[Photo by Yousuf Karsh, available through L.W. Conolly Theatre Archives,
McLaughlin Library, University of Guelph]

