

British writer, publisher and scholar Charles Kay Ogden was active in the field of linguistics and language. He is best known for The Meaning of Meaning (1923), a book co-authored with I. A. Richards, which would change semiotics permanently by offering a triadic model, consisting of symbol, referent and thought, which would replace Ferdinand de Saussure’s dyadic semiotics of signifier and signified. Ogden was active in the proliferation of English modernist literature and thought as the editor and publisher of several periodicals: Cambridge Magazine, which published notables like Thomas Hardy and George Bernard Shaw as well as Ogden’s own work; Psyche: A Journal of General and Linguistic Psychology, which he founded in 1920; and The International Library of Psychology, Philosophy and Scientific Method, which published works by Carl Jung, T. E. Hulme, Max Black, Jean Piaget, Bronisław Malinowski, G. E. Moore and others. Ogden edited Jeremy Bentham’s Theory of Fictions (1932), but his most significant contribution as an editor was to commission F. P. Ramsey (1903–1930) to translate into English Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, a work that would alter the course of philosophy of language.

British writer, publisher and scholar Charles Kay Ogden was active in the field of linguistics and language. He is best known for The Meaning of Meaning (1923), a book co-authored with I. A. Richards, which would change semiotics permanently by offering a triadic model, consisting of symbol, referent and thought, which would replace Ferdinand de Saussure’s dyadic semiotics of signifier and signified. Ogden was active in the proliferation of English modernist literature and thought as the editor and publisher of several periodicals: Cambridge Magazine, which published notables like Thomas Hardy and George Bernard Shaw as well as Ogden’s own work; Psyche: A Journal of General and Linguistic Psychology, which he founded in 1920; and The International Library of Psychology, Philosophy and Scientific Method, which published works by Carl Jung, T. E. Hulme, Max Black, Jean Piaget, Bronisław Malinowski, G. E. Moore and others. Ogden edited Jeremy Bentham’s Theory of Fictions (1932), but his most significant contribution as an editor was to commission F. P. Ramsey (1903–1930) to translate into English Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, a work that would alter the course of philosophy of language. In what would become his most popular work, again in collaboration with I. A. Richards, Ogden developed Basic English, a global language consisting of an 850 word vocabulary and advocated for global communication through the Orthological Institute. While this project was criticized by some as colonialist, the energy the pair expended in translating classic and contemporary works into Basic English (primarily for Chinese markets) was immense. Ogden and Richards would eventually experience a falling out, as Richards invested more energy in seeking university and government support for the project, while Ogden remained largely entrepreneurial in his approach.



List of Works

Bentham, J. (1932) Bentham’s Theory of Fictions, ed. C. K. Ogden, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.

The System of Basic English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. (1934)

Opposition, a Linguistic and Psychological Analysis, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. (1967)

From Significs to Orthology, ed. W. T. Gordon, London: Routledge/Thoemmes Press. (1994)

Ogden, C. K. and Richards, I. A. (1923) The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the Influence of Language upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism, London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.; New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co.

Richards, I. A. and Ogden, C. K. (1922) The Foundations of Aesthetics, London: George Allen & Unwin.

Further reading:

(Koeneke)

 (Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus) 

(Wittgenstein, Letters to C. K. Ogden with Comments on the English Translation of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus)