
Okeke, Uche (1933 - )

Born as Christopher Uchefuna Okeke in Anambra State, Nigeria in 1933, Uche
Okeke is a founding father of Nigerian Modern Art. As one of the original
members of the Zaria Art Society and the author of the groups manifesto,
which laid out the principles of Natural Synthesis, Okeke was influential
in the formation of a national aesthetic as an artist, a writer (poet and
playwright), and as a teacher. Okeke sought to bring together forms and
subjects indigenous to his Igbo ethnicity with modern, foreign influences
and techniques. He practiced primarily in pen and ink and oil painting,
exploring Igbo folklore and a body and wall painting tradition called uli.
After graduating from the University of Nigeria in Zaria, Okeke actively
promoted cultural activities throughout the country, running the Mbari
Centre Workshops in Enugu and founding the Asele Institute, which provided
studio space, educational programming and a gallery for artists. Okeke was
also influential for subsequent generations of Nigerian artists through his
teaching at the University of Nsukka during the seventies. Additionally, he
served as an ambassador for the art and culture of Nigeria for UNESCO,
helping to promote Nigerian arts throughout the world.
Although the work done by members of the Zaria Art Society varied greatly,
all members were engaged with the same effort to discover a true, modern
Nigerian art, a quest fuelled by the euphoric drive towards independence in
the late 1950s.

For Uche Okeke, uli body and wall decoration served not only as a referent
to the artistic and cultural heritage of the Igbo people, particularly the
women who practiced uli, but also a link to his personal past through his
mother, who taught him the uli forms and techniques. While he became fluent
in the visual language of uli through his mothers teaching, Okeke also
thoroughly researched the tradition through materials he found in museums
and libraries, becoming well informed on the history of the tradition and
artistically confident through these processes. He read the novels of Amos
Tutuola and Chinua Achebe, gaining a deeper understanding of the Igbo
culture through Achebes Things Fall Apart (1958). He would later go on to
collaborate with Achebe on an illustrated version of his novel. His
newfound cultural awareness along with a confidence in drawing and fluency
in the pictorial language of uli would prove useful during his 1962 sojourn
in Munich, where Okeke trained in mosaic and stained glass techniques.

This increase in confidence also helped move his work from the figurative
painting he began with at Zaria, such as Christ (1961), to more abstract
painting using uli forms, to the fluid, line-based drawings that became his
signature medium and style, such as in Onalu (1958). This line drawing
references the legendary beauty from an Igbo folktale, portrayed with
signature marks of beauty and admiring her reflection in a mirror. With
these linear compositions, Okekes work became increasingly lyrical in
style and frequently, though subtly, political in content, using
traditional forms as a way of progressing forward, not looking backward to
the past.

The self-directed education Okeke provided himself was a direct response to
the arts education he and his Art Society colleagues were receiving at
Zaria, which they believed was too foreign oriented. Out of all the
lecturers in the Zaria Fine Art Department, only one was Nigerian, and all
were trained in London. His response was not an all-out rejection of that
education, but rather a call for it to be re-evaluated, for its curriculum
to be balanced with methods, techniques and materials that related to local
culture and history, and for instructors who were well versed in these
practises. Thus, what Okeke derived from uli, Nwoko and Bruce Onobrakpeya
sought from other indigenous art forms, including Yoruba textiles, Nok
terracotta sculptures, and Urhobo folklore. Upon graduation, the group
dispersed, but Okeke and Nwoko would work together again later at the Mbari
Mbayo workshops led by Ulli Beier.

Okekes impact on the development of Nigerian Modern art extends through
several generations of artists working far beyond Zaria. In particular,
Okekes writings on Natural Synthesis and his work with uli were highly
influential on the work of Obiora Udechukwu, and later Tayo Adenaike, both
of whom trained under Okeke at the University of Nsukka, where he held the
position of the Director of the Visual Art Department, and helped form what
would come to be known as the Nsukka School during the 1970s.

List of Works:
Okeke, U. (1961) Drawings, Ibadan: Mbari.
Okeke, U.  (1960) Natural Synthesis Zaria. Reprinted in Seven Stories
about Modern Art in Africa (see below).
Okeke, U. (1972) Ekeama African Arts, Vol 5 No. 2 1972
Okeke, U., L. G. Lambert (1982) Art in Development: A Nigerian Perspective,
Asele Institute.

References and Further Reading
Chukueggu, Chinedu C. (2010) The Asele Period in Uche Okekes Creativity
1958-1966 African Research Review 4 (3a): 261-275.
Enwezor, Okwui (ed.) The Short Century: Independence and Liberation
Movements in Africa 1945-1994, Munich: Prestel.
Kasfir, S. L. (2000) Contemporary African Art, New York: Thames and Hudson.
Okeke, C. (1995) The Quest: from Zaria to Nsukka in Seven Stories about
Modern Art in Africa. Ed. Clementine Deliss, Flammarion: Paris.
Okeke-Agulu, C. (2006) Nationalism and the Rhetoric of Modernism in
Nigeria: The Art of Uche Okeke and Demas Nwoko, 1960-1968 African Arts, 39
(1): 26-37.
Onobrakpeya, B. (1995) The Zaria Art Society in Seven Stories about
Modern Art in Africa. Ed. Clementine Deliss, Flammarion: Paris.

 [pic]
Uche Okeke, Christ, 1961, oil on board, 122 cm x 61 cm. Collection of
Iwalewa-Haus, Bayreuth
[pic]
Uche Okeke, Onalu, 1958 pen and ink .Probably in: Okeke, U. Drawings and
Prints 1954-1972, Institute of African Studies, University of Nigeria,
Nsukka (1972)
