
ONEILL, EUGENE (1888-1953)

Eugene ONeill has been seen as the quintessential modernist among American
playwrights, and many of his works show an affinity with the themes and
methods of notable modernists, but he resisted alliance with any artistic
movement and ultimately resisted involvement in the theatre itself. In his
fervent exploration of the means of art, he constantly seemed to be
rejecting the methods and even the goals of his contemporaries. Some might
call his approach eclectic or experimental, but once his career was
finished, it became clear that his experiments were driven by a lifelong
project of self-analysis and a frustrated Romantic quest for fulfillment.

ONeill was born in New York City in 1888, third son of James ONeill, a
leading actor on the American stage at the point of its commercial boom.
His convent-educated mother, by then disappointed by her husband, who would
play the Count of Monte Cristo over 4000 times in his career, had
recognized the cost of commercial success in the theatrelack of a home. A
few years earlier, while they were on tour, her second son had suddenly
died, and the birth of Eugene, intended to heal that loss, coincided with
her becoming addicted to morphine. ONeill was educated in Catholic
boarding schools and grew up deeply alienated from the values of his
upbringing: Christianity, middle-class conventions, and art of the
commercial variety.

After flunking out of Princeton, ONeill tasted the Bohemian underworld of
lower Manhattan and worked as a merchant seaman. An impulsive marriage in
1909 led to the birth of a son, but the marriage was broken before the
birth, and the boy would not meet his father until the 1920s. In 1912,
ONeill was living in a flophouse, drinking self-destructively, and so
filled with self-hatred that he attempted suicide, an episode later
dramatized in Exorcism (1919). He recovered in the house of his parents, in
New London, where he worked on a newspaper and wrote poetry. Diagnosed with
tuberculosis, he entered a sanatorium and there discovered a resolve to
become a playwright. In 1907, he had seen a production of Hedda Gabler a
reported ten times. He also recalled the importance of the 1911 tour of the
Abbey Theatre, particularly the plays of J. M. Synge and T. C. Murrays
Birthright. The phoniness of his fathers brand of theatre repelled him,
but the newly translated writings of August Strindberg held great appeal.

His early efforts at playwriting were all over the map, but the plays that
got him noticed were poetic realist depictions of working class men at sea,
notably in Bound East for Cardiff (1914), which was staged by the
Provincetown Players in their second season in 1916. The Players had been
started by Greenwich Village writers and intellectuals as a place to
experiment with new forms of drama, apart from commercial pressure. Many
ventures in modernist writing were fostered there, and ONeills eclectic
writings seemed to lead the field, though he disparaged the arty pretension
of much of their work.

His eye was on becoming a professional writer, which meant Broadway, and
Beyond the Horizon (1920) was his breakthrough work. Only much later did
critics see, beyond the poetic realism, the self-reflective aspect of this
and virtually all of his dramas. At the time, what was noticed was the
seriousness of his attention to the tragic dimension of modern life. He
took a different pathway into the self in The Emperor Jones (1920), which
shows the mental breakdown of an African American convict who has taken
over a Caribbean island. When the natives revolt, he sets out to escape but
experiences a dark night of the soul in the jungle, encountering
hallucinated visions that take him back through racial memory to the point
of his initial alienation and ending with his death. An accelerating
drumbeat accompanies his flight and puts the audience into the same anxious
mental state as the character in a way that invites description as
expressionistic, though ONeill denied knowing anything of that mode of art
at the time. Expressionism can also be seen in The Hairy Ape (1922), where
again the alienation of the main character is felt scenically as much as it
is depicted literally.

Several ONeill plays of the middle period use masks or the metaphor of
masking as a way of portraying the complexity of the modern self. In The
Great God Brown (1926), characters wear masks to represent the duality of
inner and outer character, as well as the Nietzschean duality of Dionysian
and Apollonian. All Gods Chillun Got Wings (1924) became notorious for its
representation of miscegenation, but its use of black and white (in part
represented by masks) seems mainly a way of portraying polarity in human
character. Lazarus Laughed: A Play Performed for an Imaginative Theatre
(1928) takes up Nietzschean dualities in a radical retelling of the
Biblical story, using masks to characterize huge crowds. ONeills subtitle
for the play reflects an aesthetic he dubbed super-naturalism.

Strange Interlude (1928) has been seen as ONeills most clearly modernist
work. In five hours and nine acts, ONeill takes us into the minds of a set
of male characters centered on one woman. The characters freeze at moments
when one or another speaks a sometimes lengthy aside, revealing a stream of
consciousness or subtextual motivation. ONeill had great respect for James
Joyces early writing (Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man was especially
influential), not so much for Ulysses, and he had probably read Virginia
Woolfs Mrs. Dalloway, but the use of this technique on the stage was
risky. The published script became a bestseller, and the production ran for
a year and a half.

ONeills writing has been analyzed as persistently intertextual, and a
work such as Mourning Becomes Electra (1931), adapted from Aeschyluss
Oresteia, seems typical in its drawing on the wasteland of European
culture. In the last phase of his career, after winning the Nobel Prize
(1936), he turned from the public eye and from the stage itself in nakedly
autobiographical works, notably The Iceman Cometh (1939) and Long Days
Journey Into Night (1940), which reveal the deeply personal self-
investigation that had always been his project, but he withheld them from
production in a way that seems a final rejection of his father or even the
audience itself. He said that Long Days Journey should be published only
twenty-five years after his death and never produced, but his widow opted
to release the play for publication and production in 1956, three years
after he died. Along with an important revival of Iceman and newly focused
attention on the life story of the author, as now seen in the whole body of
his work, this production ushered in the ONeill revival, in which his
centrality as an American innovator was given proper recognition.

List of Works

ONeill, Eugene. (1988) Complete Plays, 3 vols., Library of America series,
New York: Literary Classics of the United States.

----- (2011) Exorcism, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

References and Further Reading

Adler, Thomas P. (2004) (Re)Claiming ONeills Strange Interlude as a
Modernist Theatre Text, in Art, Glitter, and Glitz: Mainstream Playwrights
and Popular Theatre in 1920s America, ed. Arthur Gewirtz and James J. Kolb,
Westport, CT: Praeger, 3-10.

Bogard, Travis. (1988) Contour in Time: The Plays of Eugene ONeill, New
York: Oxford University Press.

Dowling, Robert M. (2009) Critical Companion to Eugene ONeill, 2 vols.,
New York: Facts on File.

----- (2014) Eugene ONeill: A Life in Four Acts, New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Krasner, David. (2005) Eugene ONeill: American Drama and Modernism, in A
Companion to Twentieth-Century American Drama, ed. David Krasner, Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishing, 142-158

Murphy, Brenda. (2005) The Provincetown Players and the Culture of
Modernity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wainscott, Ronald H. (1988) Staging ONeill: The Experimental Years, 1920-
1934, New Haven: Yale University Press.

William Davies King, University of California Santa Barbara


Recommended Illustrations
[Note: please use all if possible to give a visual sense of the range of
the playwrights work and styles.]

[pic]
Eugene ONeill
[Available at: NYPL Digital Gallery:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?100017]


[pic]
Bound East for Cardiff, Provincetown Players, 1916.
[Available at: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/oneill/gallery/g_01.html ]

[pic]

The Hairy Ape, 1922, designed by Robert Edmond Jones and Cleon
Throckmorton.
[Billy Rose Theatre Collection, New York Public Library, available at NYPL
Digital Gallery, Image ID: 1101521:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?1101521]



[pic]

William Harrigan in The Great God Brown, 1926, directed by Robert Edmond
Jones.
[Billy Rose Theatre Collection, New York Public Library, available at:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?ps_the_2604]


[pic]
Alice Brady as Lavinia Mannon in the Theatre Guilds production of Mourning
Becomes Electra, 1931, directed by Philip Moeller, designed by Robert
Edmond Jones.
[Billy Rose Theatre collection, New York Public Library, available at:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?1110258]


[pic]

An advertisement for the Broadway premiere of Long Day's Journey Into
Night, 1956, directed by Jos Quintero.
[Billy Rose Theatre Collection, NYPL Digital Gallery, available at:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?1616454 ]

