Wendy Shaw



350 words

Painting and Sculpture Museum 



The Republic of Turkey houses its public collection of arts in the Western modality at three museums of painting and sculpture: the Istanbul Museum of Painting and Sculpture (1937); the Izmir Museum of Painting and Sculpture (1952; remodeled 1973); and the Ankara Museum of Painting and Sculpture (1981).



The Istanbul Museum of Painting and Sculpture in the apartments of the heir apparent at the Dolmabahce Palace in Istanbul (designed in 1856 by architect Nigos Balyan) opened at ceremonies hosted by the first president of the Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, on September 20, 1938. It built on the Collection of Decorated Panels, established in 1910 to serve as a source of inspiration for students at the Istanbul Academy of Fine Arts (today part of the Mimar Sinan University), with which the museum remains affiliated. Most works in the museum collection were acquired through purchase of works at the Galatasaray Exhibitions, at competitive state exhibitions established in the 1930s, and by donation. This museum houses most masterpieces of early twentieth century Turkish painting. Closed since 2006, the museum is officially slated to move to a contemporary museum venue designed by architect Emre Arolat in the Tophane district of Istanbul.



In 1952, a gallery was established as part of the Izmir Kültürpark, the grounds of Turkey’s oldest tradeshow (founded in 1948). In 1974, this gallery was transformed into the Izmir Museum of Painting and Sculpture. In 1981, the Ankara Museum of Painting and Sculpture was opened in the former Turkish Hearth Building, designed by one of the premier architects of the early Republic of Turkey, Arif Hikmet Koyunoglu. In addition to donations, the collections of both museums have been supplemented with long-term loans from the Istanbul Museum of Painting and Sculpture.



References and further reading:



Berk, Nurullah (1972) Istanbul Resim ve Heykel Müzesi : Le Musee de peinture et sculpture. Museum of Painting and Sculpture. İstanbul: APA Ofset Basımevi.



Shaw, Wendy M. K. (2007) “Museums and Narratives of Display from the Late Ottoman Empire to the Turkish Republic.” Muqarnas 23: 253-280.



Halil, Edhem (1924) Elvah-i Nakşiye Koleksiyonu. Istanbul: Matbaa-i Amire.