

	Pedro Páramo is Juan Rulfo’s only novel and by many considered his most important work, as well as one of the main creations in contemporary literature in Mexico and worldwide. It has been translated into more than thirty languages.



Pedro Páramo appeared two years after Rulfo’s first publication, the collection of short stories El Llano en llamas. Rulfo had already broken significantly with Mexico’s literary past in the latter work by exploring a style based on the meticulous study of new narrative techniques and a fictional oral language that could believably represent the speech of the Mexican peasant.

Pedro Páramo is Juan Rulfo’s only novel and by many considered his most important work, as well as one of the main creations in contemporary literature in Mexico and worldwide. It has been translated into more than thirty languages.



Pedro Páramo appeared two years after Rulfo’s first publication, the collection of short stories El Llano en llamas. Rulfo had already broken significantly with Mexico’s literary past in the latter work by exploring a style based on the meticulous study of new narrative techniques and a fictional oral language that could believably represent the speech of the Mexican peasant. Many critics kept classifying Rulfo as a regionalist writer due to the settings and themes of his short stories but the appearance of Pedro Páramo left no doubt as to the universal nature of his work. Some stories collected in El llano en llamas, such as ‘Luvina’, anticipated the narrative and structural complexity of the novel, but with Pedro Páramo Rulfo reached a dimension unknown until then in Mexican literature.



The novel, which Rulfo initially intended to name Los murmullos (The Whispers), is the story of Juan Preciado, who is urged by his dying mother to go to her birth town, Comala, to demand his due from his father, the cacique, or land baron, Pedro Páramo. In the opening of the story, Juan arrives in Comala, which since his mother’s youth has become an arid and silent place. The few people he meets seem to live in a past governed by the power and ruthless authority of Pedro Páramo or, as Juan later discovers, in a present in which they linger as ghosts. In fact, thanks to an intricate narrative technique, the reader discovers about half-way through the novel that all the characters, including Juan Preciado himself, are dead souls haunting Comala and trying to find peace. But as some critics point out, the novel is first and foremost the story of Pedro Páramo’s unhappy love for a woman, Susana San Juan, and his attempt to quench his disappointment with power.



Juan Preciado’s narrative voice and vision of the present Comala are interwoven with other voices that present visions of the fertile Comala of the past in a fragmentary and kaleidoscopic narrative, where scenes alternate without transition. The whole text is shaped by these oral narrative voices, or murmurs, and by the particular tone that pervades both Rulfo’s dialogues and narrative speech. His works have been described as being profoundly narrational, since objective description is avoided at all times in favor of implications and allusions that gradually add essential elements to the plot and often undermine the reader’s interpretation of the text.



The social and historical context of the novel is the destruction of the agricultural and semi-feudal community in Mexico in the late XIX century and its transformation into large urbanized centers with over-populated cities. As Danny J. Anderson has argued, the ghostly atmosphere in Pedro Páramo is representative of the ‘disquieting presence of a dying but not quite dead traditional Mexico’ (cf. Further reading below).



Scholars have focused on numerous aspects in Pedro Páramo: the novel has been read as an allegory of national history and politics, as a fantastic tale hovering between reality and illusion, as an exploration of new textual structures and narrative techniques, as a literary recreation of Mexican orality, as a novel exploring the communication between man and nature (the silences of man and nature), or as a modern expression of universal myths and archetypes.



English Translations

Pedro Páramo, translated by Lysander Kemp, New York: Grove Press, 1959.

Pedro Páramo, translated by Margaret Sayers Peden with a foreword by Susan Sontag, New York: Grove Press, 1994.



Online Resources

	Full text of PP and critical commentary/analysis (in Spanish):

	<http://www.pedroparamo.org/>

Pedro Páramo. Carlos Velo. 1966. Complete film: 

<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1iv3MWPyE8&feature=related>

	Section dedicated to Pedro Páramo on Rulfo’s official website:

<http://www.clubcultura.com/clubliteratura/clubescritores/juanrulfo/rulfoescritor2.htm>

Further reading:

	(Anderson)

	(Leal)

	(Sommers)

	(Zepeda)