
PENNEBAKER, Donn Alan (D.A.) (1925)

Josh Glick (Yale University)

A passionate observer of Americas most significant cultural icons and
political personalities, documentary filmmaker Donn Alan (D.A.) Pennebaker
was born in Evanston, Illinois in 1925. He studied mechanical engineering
at Yale University and served in the Naval Air Corps during World War II
before joining Drew Associates, the New York-based documentary workshop.
While collaborating with colleagues Robert Drew, Albert Maysles, and
Richard Leacock on films about John F. Kennedys administration and an
array of extraordinary citizens, Pennebaker became a pioneer of the
incipient style of direct cinema. This mode of filmmaking involved the
synchronous recording of sound and image along with fluid cinematography
that immersed the viewer in the unfolding action. Leaving Drew Associates
in 1963 in search of more artistic freedom, Pennebaker became increasingly
interested in capturing counter-cultural figures (Bob Dylan in Dont Look
Back, 1967) and music festivals and concerts (Monterey Pop, 1968). During
the mid-1970s, he formed a lasting personal and professional partnership
with the filmmaker Chris Hegedus. In addition to continuing to track
charismatic musicians and politicians, Pennebaker experimented with
documenting inventors, artists, and entrepreneurs in the later part of his
career. In 2012 he was honored with a Governors Award by the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

References and Further Reading:

D.A. Pennebakers official website: http://www.phfilms.com/

Keith Beattie, D.A. Pennebaker. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2011.

Dave Saunders. Direct Cinema: Observational Documentary and the Politics of
the
      Sixties. London: Wallflower Press, 2007.

List of Works:

Day Break Express (1953-1957): Pennebakers first film, Day Break Express
is a lyrical
      five-minute tour of New York City, shot on Kodachrome and set to the
jazz
      sounds of Duke Ellington.
Primary (1960): A feature-length chronicle of the 1960 Wisconsin Primary
election
      featuring the Democratic candidates John F. Kennedy and Hubert
Humphrey.
Dont Look Back (1967): A documentary about Bob Dylans 1965 tour of the
United
      Kingdom that spotlights the folk-rock icons mercurial persona.
Depeche Mode 101 (1989): A group of teenage fans embark on a road trip to
      meet the British synth-pop group, Depeche Mode.
War Room (1993): A behind-the-scenes look at the journey to Bill Clintons
1992
      presidential election victory, revealing the backstage contributions
      of James Carville and George Stephanopoulos.


