
Emilia Mickevicius





The Photo League (group; active 1936-1951)                    Word Count:
509

The Photo League was a cooperative of photographers in New York who were
united by shared social and creative motivations. Its members included
Morris Engel, Sid Grossman, Helen Levitt, Walter Rosenblum, Aaron Siskind,
Paul Strand, and Weegee. Other figures who supported the group but were not
members included Berenice Abbott, Ansel Adams, Margaret Bourke-White,
Dorothea Lange, Lisette Model, and Beaumont Newhall. The League was active
from 1936 to 1951, and held regular meetings throughout its duration, as
well as events, lectures, and symposia to promote education in photography
skills and techniques. It also maintained darkroom facilities and an
exhibition space in New York, initially on 21st Street and later on 10th
Street. Joining social and political efficacy with a dedication to
aesthetic standards, and in an environment that stressed creative
collaboration, members of the Photo League produced imagery that
contributed to the development of documentary practice within the greater
creative and cultural ferment of the 1930s. On December 4th, 1942, the
Photo League was included on the list of subversive organizations
submitted by U.S. Attorney General Tom C. Clark to President Harry S.
Truman. The League denied the charges in a press release, and further
challenged their blacklisting in a telegram sent directly to Attorney
General Clark. Under this pressure, they ceased activity in 1951.

As the outgrowth of an intricate network of organizations, the Photo League
traces its genealogy to the Workers International Relief (WIR). This
American chapter of the Berlin-based Internationale Arbeiterhilfe (IAH) was
supported by the Communist International, and established the Workers
Camera League in New York City in 1930. Politically pro-union and anti-
fascist, the Workers Camera League became known as the Workers Film and
Photo League (WFPL). Taking cues from Soviet cinema, the collective of
filmmakers, photographers, writers, and projectionists produced creative
material that addressed the struggles of the American working class. Two
factions eventually formed to address the needs of still photographers and
filmmakers separately. Paul Strand and board member Berenice Abbott
spearheaded the still-photography group in 1936 and called it The Photo
League.

The Photo League did not advocate a particular visual style, though members
generally committed to urban social documentation presented in clear,
sharply defined images. With the invention of faster film and the marketing
of small handheld cameras such as the Leica in the early 1920s,
photographers had become better equipped to record passing moments on the
street. Emblematic of the street photography produced by the League are the
photographs of Helen Levitt and Weegee, as well as the collaborative
projects of Aaron Siskind.

References and Further Reading

Creative Camera, nos. 223 and 224 (July/August 1983). Special issue devoted
to the Photo League.

History of Photography Vol. 18, No. 2 (Summer 1994). Special issue devoted
to the Photo League.

International Center of Photography. The Photo League: Harlem Document and
Related Works. http://www.icp.org/museum/exhibitions/photo-league-harlem-
document-and-related-works

The Jewish Museum, New York and the Columbus Museum of Art. The Radical
Camera: New Yorks Photo League, 1936-1951. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2011.

New York Public Library. Where Do We Go From Here? The Photo League and
Its Legacy, 1936-2006. http://web-
static.nypl.org/exhibitions/league/index.html


Visual Material:

[pic]

Aaron Siskind, Harlem Lady in a Kitchen, 1940

Gelatin Silver Print

International Center of Photography

ICP 98.1981

http://museum.icp.org/museum/exhibitions/photo_league/images/introduction.ht
m



[pic]

Walter Rosenblum, Moving Man, Pitt Street, Lower East Side, 1938

Gelatin silver print

Museum of Modern Art, New York

1949.2008

http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=118994



[pic]

Helen Levitt, New York, 1940 (NOTE: this date is from the Art Institute of
Chicago, but MoMAs website says ca. 1945. Since the AIC says definitively
1940, that is the date I chose to use).

Gelatin silver print

The Art Institute of Chicago

2000.166

http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/155671?search_no=5&index=24





