
(see email from Donkin  she sent this to me on 7-29-130


Photomontage

Photomontage includes a wide variety of practices, based on the assemblage
of primarily photographic material. Photomontage can be made from
photographs and photo fragments cut with a blade from an existing source
and pasted onto a support; from composite images of negatives fused in the
darkroom; from excised and reassembled photographs that have been re-
photographed to produce a seamless surface; by using the crop, cut, and
paste function in a computer program and reassembling a new photographic
image. Text, colour, drawing, painting, or object fragments can also be
incorporated. The inter-war period represented the apex of photomontage,
when the medium was widely used as a persuasive medium, from publicity to
propaganda, particularly by artists affiliated to Constructivism, Dada,
Surrealism and the Bauhaus.  In its dynamic reassembly of image and text,
photomontage offered a visually stimulating picture with claims to
documentation because of the photographs purported status as a document of
the real. Photomontage both questioned and profited from this documentary
standing. Based on mass-replicated images, photomontage could easily be
reproduced, utilized for commercial and political posters, book jackets,
book and journal illustrations, magazine covers and page layouts,
advertisements, photomurals, exhibition catalogues, industrial-product
brochures, department-store pamphlets, film advertising, and exhibition
installation.

Organized around the structural principle of pictorial disruption and re-
assembly, photomontage is considered a symbolic form or paradigm of the
modern. Its optical fragmentation and simultaneous competition of pictorial
fragments conjured the accelerated social, economic, and technological
transformations of the twentieth century. Photomontage also imitated modern
industrial production in its assembly of pre-fabricated, mass-replicable
parts. In Germany, where photomontage was widely used, the connection of
montage to industrial assembly line production is linguistically explicit,
for montieren means to assemble or to fit while a Monteur is a mechanic
or engineer. Photomontage was thus linked with mass reproduction and modern
manufacture rather than the institution of high art, symbolized by the
unrepeatable act of painting.

Berlin Dada is often credited with the invention of photomontage, the
honour split between two competing factions: Hannah Hch and Raoul Hausmann
on the one hand and George Grosz and John Heartfield on the other. On
summer holiday in the Baltic Sea, Hch and Hausmann discovered in their
rented fishermans cottage a colour lithograph of military personnel onto
which had been pasted the head of the fishermans son, evidently a soldier.
These prints turned into photomontage were common in German homes before
and during World War I, transforming stock, mass-produced military images
into private mementos. Heartfield and Grosz too located their discovery of
photomontage in wartime habits, namely the practice of sending postcards
from the front onto which photograph clippings had been pasted that
suggested in images what would have been censored in words. Though these
recollections vary with the narrator, the discovery of photomontage by the
avant-garde derived from a popular practice that reclaimed mass media
images for individual use. Photomontage was widely used to galvanize
popular opinion through modern, mass-reproducible means.

References and further reading.

Dawn Ades, Photomontage, (London: Thames and Hudson, 1976).

Brigid Doherty, See? We are all Neurasthenics! Or, the Trauma of Dada
Montage,Critical Inquiry, Autumn 1997, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 82-132.

Special issue Dada and Photomontage across Borders, New German Critique
36 (2/107), Summer 2009, pp. 53-88

Annegret Jrgens-Kirchhoff, Technik und Tendenz der Montage (Lahn-Giessen:
Anabas Verlag, 1978

Hiepe, Richard, Die Fotomontage:  Geschichte und Wesen einer
Kunstform,exhibition catalogue, (Stadt und Kunstverein Ingolstadt, 1969).

Teitelbaum, Matthew, ed., Montage and Modern Life, (MIT Press, 1992).

