

Polish Expressionism


In contrast to the German movement, Polish Expressionism did not involve a
whole generation of artists but only a small part of it. Historical
Expressionism (1910-25) played only a marginal role in Polish artistic
life; more important was the early, symbolist ExpressionismXPRESSIONISM at
the turn from the 19th to the 20th century with its affinity for hyperboles
and grotesque expressions in the prose and poetry of Jan Kasprowicz,
Tadeusz Miciski, Wacaw Berent and Roman Jaworski. In the visual arts, it
was characterized by an anti-naturalist deformation of space and the use of
colour accompanied by existential themes in the works of Wadysaw
Podkowiski and Stanisaw Wyspiaski. Unique in this context are the
abstract, musical compositions of the Warsaw painter Mikalojus
iurlionis.


The work of EdvardDVARD MunchUNCH and Gustav Vigeland popularised by
Stanisaw Przybyszewski provided an important influence for artists such as
Wojciech Weiss, Xawery Dunikowski and Franciszek Flaum. Przybyszewski
played a stimulating role in the biweekly Zdrj (Source, 1917-22, edited by
Jerzy Hulewicz in Pozna), a leading forum of the only programmatic
Expressionist circle in Poland. This artist group included Margarete and
Stanisaw Kubicki, Wadysaw Skotarek, Stefan Szmaj and other less radical
artists who programmatically used the bilingual name Bunt (Polish  Revolt,
German  colourful, 1917-22) and employed linocut as an egalitarian
artistic medium. The Kubickis and Hulewicz also produced the earliest
examples of AbstractBSTRACT ArtRT in Poland. The first group exhibition in
April 1918 was a success de scandal because of its social and political
provocation, promoting sexual liberation and international spirit in a
traditional and national oriented milieu. The second exhibition was
organised at the Berlin gallery Die Aktion in June. The following three
shows in Pozna and Lvov in 1919 and 1920 where organised in collaboration
with the Formici group (Formists, 1917-22) from Cracow and Young Yiddish
(1919-22) from d (see YiddishIDDISH AvantVANT-GardeARDE). While Young
Yiddish, like Bunt, was engaged in international leftist artistic
activities, Formici concentrated on formal questions, which initiated Art
Dco, a Polish national style inspired by folk art, and distanced itself
from any German connotations. SWhile some artists of Bunt and Young
Yiddish, who eventually became members of InternationalNTERNATIONAL
ConstructivismONSTRUCTIVISM, cooperated with Der Sturm and participated in
the Congress of the International Union of Progressive Artists in
Dsseldorf and the International Exhibition of Revolutionary Artists
organised by the Kubickis in Berlin in 1922., However, the writers of Zdrj
with Jan Stur, like Formici, tended to favour a Polonisation of
Eexpressionism by looking for its genealogy in the Polish romantic
tradition. The anthology of the movement was Zmierzch Epoki [(Twilight of
the Epoch], (1920).


Expressionism was also present as literary poetics in manifestations of
Polish FuturismUTURISM and DadaismADAISM in Cracow and Warsaw. In the
visual arts, it included the work of some PolishOLISH representatives of
the coleCOLE deDE ParisARIS, among them Eli Nadelmann and Alfred Aberdam.
The art works of Stanisaw Ignacy Witkiewicz and the poetry of Jzef
Wittlin and the group Czartak (1922-28, founded by Emil Zegadowicz)
contained an original Polish contribution to late Expressionism.




References and further readings:

Marek Bartelik, Early Polish modern Art. Unity in multiplicity,
Manchester/New York: Manchester University Press, 2005.

Timothy O. Benson (ed.), Central European Avant-Gardes: Exchange and
Transformation, 1910-1930, Cambridge, Mass./London: The MIT Press, 2002.

Lidia Guchowska, Polish and Polish-Jewish Modern and Avant-Garde artists
in the Capital of the United States of Europe, c. 1910-1930, Centropa,
Sept. 2012 (forthcoming).

Piotr ukaszewicz, Jerzy Malinowski, Ekspresjonizm w sztuce polskiej,
Wrocaw: Muzeum Narodowe, 1980.

Jzef Ratajczak (ed.), Krzyk i ekstaza. Antologia polskiego ekspresjonizmu,
Pozna: Wydawnictwo Poznaskie, 1897.

Suggested images:





1.    Stanisaw Wyspiaski, Kazimierz Wielki, pastel, project of the
   stained glass for the cathedral in Cracow, 1904, National Museum Cracow.

http://www.imnk.pl/gallerybox.php?dir=XX079





      Stanisaw Kubicki, The Tower of Babel, linocut, c. 1918, Coll.
      Kubicki, Berlin


   http://www.mystudios.com/artgallery/S/Stanislaw-Kubicki/Tower-of-
   Babel.html






      Stanislaw Kubicki, Bunt (The revolt), linocut, 1918 at the cover of
      the magazine Die Aktion 21/22, 1918 entitled Polnische Kunst (Polish
      Art), The Moma Collection, New York


   http://www.moma.org/collection_images/resized/472/w500h420/CRI_245472.jpg





      Jerzy Hulewicz, The Cross, linocut, c. 1918, National Museum of Warsaw


   http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2a/Hulewicz-krzyz.jpg





