


Writer: Sandip K Luis

The Baroda Figurative-Narrative Movement

The Baroda Figurative-Narrative Movement was a loosely organised but highly
influential development in the Indian art of the early 1980s. The movement
was against modernist abstraction in general, and its puritanism in
particular.  This novel enthusiasm for narration and figurative painting
claimed no regional or ideological identity; the artists affiliated with it
have been from many parts of India, with varying styles of painting.
Nonetheless, the appellative Baroda and the identification as a movement
or school are quite common, because of the association with the Baroda art
world, whose nucleus was the Fine Arts Faculty of the M. S. University in
Baroda, Gujarat. The inaugural event of the movement is considered to be
the renowned Place for People exhibition (1981). The participants were
Jogen Chowdhury (1939-), Bhupen Khakhar (1934-2003), Nalini Malani(1946-),
Sudhir Patwardhan (1949-), Gulammohammed Sheikh (1937-) and Vivan Sundaram
(1943-). The manifesto-like essay for the exhibition catalogue was written
by the art historian Geeta Kapur (1943-). The movement was a highly
successful venture whose most important and immediate result in an
increasingly liberalising India was the creation of a visible art market.
This success depended on many factors, among them the complementarity of
the movement with the general return of painting in the international art
scene of the 1980s; the figurative and narrative turn in British
painting; and, last but not least, the artists institutional alliance with
the Royal College of Art and the British art world.

Formation Of The Name And Ideology

In discussing the Baroda-centred art practices of 1980s, the term
figurative-narrative carries an ambiguous lineage. Though it first
appeared in Geeta Kapurs essay Realism and Modernism (1979-80), the term
as such was not present in the catalogue essay written for the Place for
People exhibition. Instead, in Kapurs writings, as well as many others
produced by the proponents of the movement, the concepts figurative and
narrative enjoyed separate but synergetic functions  the former to brand
the new artists against the abstractionists and the latter, vaguely, to
name the linguistic outcome of their aesthetic.

Whereas the term figurative was already established in Indian art as an
oppositional category against abstract by the end of 1960s, the term
narrative was, according to Sheikh, first introduced by the British
artist Timothy Hyman, who served as a Visiting Professor in Baroda between
1980 and 1982. In 1979, Hyman curated a travelling exhibition, Narrative
Painting: Figurative Art of Two Generations, in Britain, to which he
invited Bhupen Khahar as an honorary member, along with a group of British
artists including R. B. Kitaj, Peter de Francia (both from the Royal
College of Art, and the mentors of Sundaram and Kapur respectively) and
Howard Hodgkin (who was, despite being an abstract painter, a close
associate of the artists of Place for People  as Sundarams painting
People Come and Go, displayed in the exhibition, suggests.)

Whereas the enthusiasm for figurative painting in early 1980s British art
was received critically by leftist circles, the Indian figurative-narrative
movement of the same period maintained a somewhat leftist, if not exactly
Marxist, identity with less controversy, at least until the intervention of
the Indian Radical Painters and Sculptors Association. Part of the reason
for this reason lies in the successful launching of the Journal of Arts and
Ideas in 1982 (it ran until 1999), a leftist trimonthly, with Kapur,
Sundaram and Patwardhan as the founding members in its editorial board. The
first edition of the journal carried not only an extensive review of Place
for People by Ajay Sinha, but also an art-historical justification for
figurative-narrative art by Kapur. Moreover, though Kapurs catalogue essay
for Place for People was devoid of any ideological partisanship other than
a strong defence of figurative art, her Realism and Modernism essay was
originally a paper presented at a 1979 seminar on Marxism and Aesthetics
organised by the Kasauli Art Centre (founded by Sundaram) with the
collaboration of the Indian leftist journal Social Scientist. Kapurs
theorisation of figurative-narrative as a synonym for realism in art,
with extensive references to the recently released English translation of
the famous Realism/Modernism debate of western Marxism, placed the new
aesthetic in a discourse diametrically opposite to Hymans subjectivism.
Thus, drawing from Frederic Jamesons afterword to the debate, Kapur argued
that the dialectical thrust of realism/modernism seems to point towards a
figural art that is narrative and objective. Kapurs example of such a
Realist aesthetic was the recent art of R. B. Kitaj, in which ordinary
people were portrayed in the way they expose the viewer to others pain,
to his own bad conscience, to a shared neurosis. Kitaj himself was, as
Kapur notes, an admirer of Walter Benjamin as well as literary realists
like Tolstoy and Dostoevsky.

However, it is important to note that the movement did not have a coherent
ideology or outlook other than a liberal-pluralist one. As Sundaram put it
later, because [Place for People] was not organised as a movement to
support a manifesto, each of us have retracted a little bit into our own
personal preoccupation and let the work follow a logic of its own. Only a
survey of the sociocultural context of the time can tell us how the
movement could be, despite its short lifespan and lack of any explicit
ideology, an important event in Indian art history.

CONTEXT

The historical necessity to respond to the overarching institutional crisis
of modernism in India was a motivating force behind the rediscovery of
realism in the aesthetic of the figurative-narrative movement. Unlike in
the advanced capitalist countries such as Britain, where the return of
painting and disavowal of avant-gardist strategies were received as
conservative trends, an anti-institutional or avant-gardist intervention in
art was generally discouraged even in the leftist pockets of the Indian art
world.  The decline of Indias state modernization project and the rise of
religious forces in the early 1970s; the declaration of Emergency in 1975
and the years following it; and the chaos in national politics were
paralleled in the Indian art world by similar instances of breakdown.
Abstraction in art reached an esoteric and occult status in the so-called
Neo-Tantric movement in the early 1970s. The Emergency was publicly
supported by the most celebrated artist of Indian modernism, M. F. Husain,
through a series of paintings.  State institutions of art such as the
National Gallery of Modern Art and the Lalit Kala Academy faced much
criticism for their controversial aesthetic preferences as well as
nepotistic policies. In this context of what can be identified as a decline
of modernism, the search for an alternative arrived at the idea of the
figurative-narrative

      Not accidentally, this new interest in realism coincided with the rise
of a new Indian middle class.  Barring the works of Patwardhan (for its
working-class realist content), most of the paintings exhibited in Place
for People can be clearly seen as autobiographical narratives of the middle-
class artist. Thus, Sheikhs Revolving Routes (1981) shows a self-portrait
of the artist at centre, indulging in personal reveries spanning from
childhood to present life with friends and colleagues of the Baroda art
world, including Kapur, Sundaram, Khakhar and Hyman. Sundaram exhibited
Portrait of his Father (1980) (K. V. K Sundaram, a powerful bureaucrat and
Padma Vibhushan holder), and People Come and Go, a representation of
Khakhars private studio and his friends, including Hodgkin. Malanis
Concerning a Friend (1981) depicts a close conversation between the artist
and Geeta Kapur, located in Kapurs fashionable apartment. Khakhars You
Cant Please All (1981), a complex painting prefiguring his later
declaration of gay identity, sarcastically narrates the futility of public
life and the lure of private pleasures.

CRITICISM

The crux of criticism against the movement lies in the question of how to
deal with the crisis of the 1970s and the concurrent decline of modernism.
Was avant-gardism or realism the effective antidote to such a degenerated
modernism? In fact, many avant-gardist or surrealist strategies
(fragmentation through allegory, multiple perspectives) can be found in the
figurative-narrative language, though it is strikingly missing the avant-
gardes critique of the institution of art. Thus, Kapurs later thesis that
we had a modernism without avant-garde only describes the reformist
nature of Indian modernism, of which the figurative-narrative movement had
very much been a part.



It is a point of debate whether the aesthetic of the figurative-narrative
artists was realist as Kapur had envisaged or postmodernist, as it was
later severely criticised in the quasi-avant-gardist manifesto of the
Indian Radical Painters and Sculptures Association, written by Anita Dube
in 1987. For Dube, The Narrative movement, in India, [] taking character,
from the British example and continuing a tradition of colonial patronage
and approval; [was] the Indian version of an archaeology of historicism
emerging from the post-modern. Whereas Dube and her colleagues were right
in pointing out the role of the British art world in the success of the
figurative-narrative movement, their branding of the new aesthetic as
postmodern following Frederic Jamesons essay, Postmodernism, or the
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1984), could not go further due to
their inability to locate the crux of the existing historical problematic.
This latter point is clearer in the following remark made by Dube: With
the use of multiple references [], pseudo historical content, []
narration, [and] a rhetorical tone, a myth is created [in the figurative-
narrative paintings] which says that, that which is being portrayed is
reality and the historical.Yet Dube and her colleagues failed to notice
that the figurative-narrative artists use of multiple references, fictive
and actual, under the claim of being historical was intended to oppose the
similar efforts made by the proto-fascist forces of the time to synthesis
the cultural multiplicity of the nation into a repressive homogeneity. At
the same time, critics were quite right in locating a certain logic of
multinational capitalism in the movements institutional success, if not
straightforwardly in its aesthetic. The exhibition Timeless Art in 1988,
which was solely dedicated to the new figurative art and included all six
painters of Place for People along with several upcoming artists of the
Baroda artworld, caused controversy through Sothebys auctioning of the
exhibits (the first time for Indian art) and the protest against the sale
by the Indian Radical Painters and Sculptors Association. Whereas the
protest was the last collective action of the Association outside Kerala
(the native place of its members except Dube), the success of the
exhibition and auction consolidated the presence of the personalities
associated with the figurative-narrative movement for the coming decades of
Indian art.

References and Further Reading:

Dube, Anita. (1987) "Questions and Dialogue ." Manifesto of Indian Radical
Painters and Sculptors Association. Exhibition catalogue.

Gopinath and Fibicher. (2007) In Conversation with Gulammohammed Sheikh,"
Horn Please: Narratives in Contemporary Indian Art, Hatje Cantz.

Hyman, T. (1979) Narrative Paintings: Figurative Art of Two Generations,
Bristol: Arnolfini.

Kapur, Geeta. (1979-80) Realism and Modernism: A Polemic for Present-Day
Art. Social Scientist, no 5-6, Vol. 8, Dec. 1979-Jan. 1980, pp: 91-100

Kapur, Geeta. (1981) "Partisan Views about the Human Figure," Place for
People, Bombay: Jahangir Art Gallery ; Delhi: Rabindra Bhavan.

Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. (1997) "The Last Decade" In Contemporary Art in
Baroda, edited by Gulammohammed Sheikh. Tulika: 213-344.

Sinha, Ajay. (1982) "Place for People-New Images", Journal of Arts and
Ideas, October-December 1982: 19-28.

Sinha, Ajay. (1997) "Envisioning the Seventies and the Eighties ",
Contemporary Art in Baroda, edited by Gulammohammed Sheikh. Tulika: 146-
209.

Sundaram, Vivan. (1984) Language, Narrative and the Viewer: A Personal
Reading of the Contemporary Indian Narrative Art, Nandan, Shantiniketan:
Viswabharati: 57-64.

Sundaram, Vivan. (1991) A Tradition of the Modern, Journal of Arts and
Ideas, No 20-21, March 1991: 33-40.

Illustrations

   1. 'People Come and Go' (1981) Vivan Sundaram, Oil on Canvas, 152.4cm x
      123.2cm, Courtsey-Asia Art Archive
      (http://www.aaa.org.hk/Collection/CollectionOnline/SpecialCollectionIte
      m/3456)

      [pic]

   2. 'City for Sale' (1981-4) Gulammohammed Sheikh, Oil on Canvas, Trustees
      of the Victoria and Albert Museum, Image Courtsey-
      www.theotherspaces.com (http://www.theotherspaces.com/Gulam-
      Sheikh/1445/gallery.aspx)

      [pic]







