
Henri Pousseur
John Dack

HENRI POUSSEUR. Born in Malmdy, Belgium on June 23th, 1929, died on March
6th, 2009 in Brussels. Pousseur studied music at Lige and Brussels. He was
introduced to 12-tone music at Lige and was later associated with serial
composers like Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Pierre Boulez and
Luciano Berio at Darmstadt and Donaueshingen. He also composed electronic
music and worked at the Studio di fonologia in Milan and the Westdeutscher
Rundfunk studio in Cologne. In his own musical language Pousseur began to
assimilate stylistic characteristics which were prohibited by strict serial
thought. He was also a dedicated educator and taught at universities and
conservatories in Lige, Cologne, Basle and Buffalo in the United States.
He retired from these duties in 1994 but continued to compose. An important
aspect of his work was his commitment to open forms and several of his
most important works were composed according to these principles.

HENRI POUSSEUR
HENRI POUSSEUR was a Belgian composer and music theorist. His birth-place
of Malmdy in the French-speaking region of Belgium was important to
Pousseur in many respects. Malmdys history and proximity to Germany means
that many inhabitants speak German. Thus, from an early age Pousseur was
aware of not only French, but German, culture. He can therefore be regarded
as a link between the French and German musical avant-gardes. Pousseur
studied at the conservatoires in Lige and Brussels. At Lige he was
introduced to 12-tone music by one of his professors Pierre Froidebise.
Webern in particular became an important composer for Pousseur. He detected
in Weberns music the intention to create an equality of all musical
elements and to control them in networks of tensions. Pousseur participated
in the Darmstadt Ferienkurse fr neue Musik with other composers who were
extending the serial method such as Stockhausen, Berio, Boulez, Maderna and
Nono. His early compositions such as Symphonie  quinze solistes (1954)
were rigorously serial. Thereafter a decision to break with serial
orthodoxy can be detected. It was, according to Pousseur, due to Romantic
atavism and a love of the historical development of music. He incorporated
sounds of non-European music and early music not in a trivial appropriation
of the past, but to incorporate and thereby understand musical tradition.
This, refusal to break with past languages led to a form of pluralism which
caused tension between Pousseur and other composers, notably Pierre Boulez.

Pousseur was also committed to the open form. This musical technique has
roots in Mallarms Le Livre as well as Umberto Ecos Opera Operta (1962).
In open form compositions the choice of musical material and/or the
structure of the work can be determined by the performers or the audience.
For example, Pousseurs electronic composition Scambi (realised at the
Studio di Fonologia in Milan in 1957) has 32 sections of filtered white
noise which can be reconfigured according to guidelines devised by the
composer. Furthermore, in Pousseurs opera Votre Faust (1961-68) there are
points where the audience decides on the works development. Votre Faust is
also noteworthy as the first of many important collaborations with the
French poet and novelist Michel Butor. Pousseurs open works are not a
capricious abandonment of the composers responsibility. They exemplify his
view of a social utopia (inspired by Ernst Bloch) where people regard
Western culture as unfinished and open to re-evaluation and re-working.

Another distinctive feature of Pousseurs output is the notion of
satellite works where one work could provide material that would appear
in subsequent autonomous compositions. An example is his Huit Etudes
Paraboliques (1972). These electronic works were realised as controlled
real-time improvisations at the Westdeutscher Rundfunk studio. They can be
heard in this form or they can be re-mixed and combined with other sounds
or live instruments to form Paraboles-Mixe such as the Paraboles-mix mit
Hllenlektionen performed in Cologne in 1999.

POUSSEUR AS TEACHER
Pousseur combined his career as a composer with that of a dedicated
teacher. He held positions at Lige University and the Lige Conservatoire
where he was appointed Director in 1975. Pousseur retired from his official
duties in 1994. He also taught in Cologne, Basle and New York State
University in Buffalo. In addition, Pousseur founded with Pierre
Bartholome the Centre de Recherches Musicales de Wallonie in Lige and
with Eric Sprogis, the Institut de Pdagogie Musicale in the Parc de
Villette in Paris. His interests in teaching and willingness to explain his
methods resulted in various theoretical/pedagogical texts such as
LApothose de Rameau (1968) and Parabeln und Spiralen (2002). In addition,
in 1988 he started to compile in 1988 a number of works collected together
under the name Mthodicare. These works range from elementary to advanced
in terms of their degree of difficulty for the players. It was Pousseurs
belief that contemporary music can be presented to the beginner in such a
carefully graded series of pieces. It was part of his utopian vision of
society that modern art and music can be taught without compromises.
Furthermore, Pousseurs use of open forms in Scambi and the Huit tudes
paraboliques has much relevance to contemporary practices of live mixing
and algorithmic composition.

References and further reading
Pousseur, H. (1968) LApothose de Rameau in La Revue desthtique (This
article is a detailed description of Pousseurs methods of composition.
With a particular emphasis on harmony he introduced the notion of pitch
networks)
Pousseur, H. (1970) Fragments thoriques I sur la musique exprimentale
Brussels: Editions de lUniversit de Bruxelles (In this book Pousseur
gives an account of serial music and chance as well as the beginnings of
electronic music.  The book is subtitled Sociological Studies of Music)
Metzger, H-K. & Riehn, R. (1990) Henri Pousseur Musik-Konzepte 69 Mnchen:
edition text + kritik (This book contains articles by musicologists on
aspects of Pousseurs work. It also contains a detailed work-list and
bibliography)
Pousseur, H. (2002) Parabeln und Spiralen Mnster: Lit Verlag (Pousseur
discusses the composition of the Huit tudes paraboliques. There are also
transcriptions of presentations he gave at Cologne University about his
composition methods as well as an audio CD of the Paraboles-mix mit
Hllenlektionen)

Selected list of works
Pousseur, H. (1957) Scambi Acousmatrix 4 BVHAAST CD 9010 (Scambi is an
open form electronic work. Realized using analogue technology at the
Studio di Fonologia in Milan)
Pousseur, H. (1967) Couleurs croises (1967) CYP 4621 (The musical material
and form of this orchestral work is derived from the protest song We Shall
Overcome)
Pousseur, H. (1972) Huit tudes paraboliques Sub Rosa SR 147 (Realized at
the WDR studio in Cologne, these tudes provide material for live and
studio-based re-mixing)
Pousseur, H. (1993) Dichterliebesreigentraum CYP 7602 (For soprano,
baritone, two pianos, chorus and small orchestra. Inspired by Pousseurs
analysis of Schumanns Dichterliebe)

