
Psychedelic Cinema
Juan Carlos Kase (University of North Carolina Wilmington)
With the rise of the counterculture as a sociopolitical  phenomenon  in  the
mid-1960s, a new visual style  manifested  itself  in  an  array  of  public
spaces and media forms, including rock and roll light shows, popular  poster
design, hippie clothing, underground comic books, and  experimental  cinema.
From their inception, psychedelic art and culture  were  closely  associated
with hallucinogenic drugs, being often intended  to  function  either  as  a
source of contemplation  to  enhance  the  hallucinatory  experience  (while
viewers were under the influence of LSD or marijuana) or as a  mechanism  to
approximate the psychic transformations associated with such substances.  In
its various visual permutations  across  media,  the  psychedelic  aesthetic
emphasized organic shapes (as opposed to linear or geometric ones), mandala-
inspired circular  patterns,  non-figurative  composition,  ornate  gestural
filigree, and a bright, non-natural, color palette.
      In cinema, this cultural trend exerted some degree of influence across
a  range  of  works  that  dealt  with  countercultural  topics,   including
commercial narrative films (Easy  Rider  [1969]),  low  budget  exploitation
(The Trip [1967]), European art cinema (Zabriskie Point  [1970]),  animation
(Yellow Submarine [1968]), and non-fiction (Monterey Pop  [1968]).  However,
the epicenter of Psychedelic Cinema  was  the  experimental  film  nexus  of
1960s California. In their  abstract  film  works,  West  Coast  psychedelic
filmmakers such as Jordan Belson and Scott Bartlett (in San  Francisco),  or
James Whitney and Pat ONeill (in Los Angeles),  achieved  an  unprecedented
array of non-representational visual textures that in their  intense,  lush,
and incandescent registers, achieved a  kind  of  sensorial  overstimulation
associated with the countercultures central aesthetic and  political  goals
of expanding consciousness. These works were intended to test the limits  of
cognition and sensory tolerance, and by doing so, were  geared  towards  the
reconfiguration of the  viewers  expectations  about  art,  life,  and  the
imagined division between them.
      In  their  desire  to  approximate  interior  space,  the  psychedelic
filmmakers of the 1960s harkened back to the extreme graphic abstraction  of
modernist artists and filmmakers like Oskar Fischinger,  Lazlo  Moholy-Nagy,
Fernand Leger (with Dudley Murphy), and Man Ray, who used  the  film  camera
and the resources of montage, re-photography, and single-frame animation  to
untether  cinema  from  conventional  realistic   modes.   The   Californian
filmmakers of the 1960s were acutely aware that they  were  working  in  the
age of television and rock and roll, and as such, their work modernized  the
virtuosic plasticity of earlier, modernist avant-garde  cinema  through  the
use of video effects and nascent computer technologies, and  married  it  to
the textual iconography of Eastern religion and the  color  palette  of  Pop
Art. Films such as James Whitneys  Lapis  (1966)  a  swirling,  pointillist
mandala set to Ravi Shankar, or Pat ONeills 7362 (1967), a study in  color
saturation, Rorschach symmetries, and industrial  sound,  perfectly  utilize
extremely complex, labor intensive technologies to achieve  a  multi-layered
effect of synaesthetic trance and sensory overload.
      In addition to the West Coast, there were other artistic  enclaves  in
which  this  psychedelic  cinema  flourished,  including  New  York:  There,
filmmaker Jud Yalkut collaborated with video artist Nam June  Paik  and  the
utopian USCO media collective  (actually  located  outside  the  city),  and
Barbara Rubin produced Christmas on  Earth  (1963),  a  notorious  orgiastic
experiment in multi-layered  images.  Though  the  psychedelic  tendency  of
experimental cinema was less pronounced in Europe, there were a  handful  of
film artistsmost notably, Frenchman Pierre  Clementiwho  took  their  cues
from the American counterculture and produced explosive works  of  bristling
lysergic energy.
      By the early-to-mid  1970s,  the  utopian  exuberance  of  Psychedelic
Cinema petered out (as did the counterculture that had nourished it), to  be
superseded, at least within the avant-garde,  by  the  severe  and  rigorous
work of so-called Structural Film.
Related entries: Expanded Cinema, The Chelsea Girls, Peace Mandala/End War.
Bibliography and Further Reading
Grunenberg, Ch. (ed.) (2005) Summer of Love:  Art  of  the  Psychedelic  Era
(London: Tate Publishing).

James, D. (1989) Underground Cinema  in  Allegories  of  Cinema:  American
Film in the 1960s (Princeton: Princeton University Press), pp. 119140.

Joseph, B. (2002) My Mind Split Open:  Andy  Warhols  Exploding  Plastic
Inevitable, Grey Room No. 8: 80107.

Youngblood, G. (1970) Expanded Cinema (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1970)

