

Elsa Barraine’s precocious musical talents were recognised at an early age, and she entered the Paris Conservatoire at the age of twelve. She studied composition with Paul Dukas, harmony with Jean Gallon (premier prix 1925), fugue with Georges Caussade (premier prix 1927), and accompaniment with André Estyle (premier prix 1927). She won the Prix de Rome in 1929. Between 1936 and 1940, and again after the war until 1948, Barraine worked for Radio France. She was active within the French struggle against the Occupation, during the Second World War, by co-founding the Front national des musiciens pour la liberté et l’indépendance de la France, with Roger Désormière and Louis Durey. She was appointed to the teaching staff of the Paris Conservatoire in 1952, working as a professor of sight-reading until 1969, and then as a professor of analysis. Barraine’s compositional process was intricately bound up with her personal Humanistic and humanitarian beliefs, and reactions to the tumultuous upheavals of the twentieth century. Despite its raw emotional context, her music (with the exception of the serial Musique rituelle, 1966-7) is essentially tonal and cast within vigorous formal structures. She is recognised as one of the leading French composers of the twentieth century.

Elsa Barraine was born into a musical family; her father was the principal cellist at the Paris Opera. Her precocious musical talents were recognised at an early age, and she entered the Paris Conservatoire at the age of twelve. At the Conservatoire, Barraine studied composition with Paul Dukas, harmony with Jean Gallon (premier prix 1925), fugue with Georges Caussade (premier prix 1927), and accompaniment with André Estyle (premier prix 1927). In 1929, Barraine became the fourth woman to win the premier grand prix de Rome in musical composition for her cantata La Vierge Guerrière, at the exceptionally young age of only nineteen. Between 1936 and 1940, Barraine worked for Radio France, as a pianist, sound recordist, and head of singing. During the Second World War, she was active within the French struggle against the Occupation. In 1940 she co-founded the Front national des musiciens pour la liberté et l’indépendance de la France (National front of musicians for the freedom and independence of France) with Roger Désormière and Louis Durey. She was engaged as Musical Director for the recording firm Chant du Monde from 1944 to 1947, and after the war she also worked as a sound mixer for Radio France until 1948. Barraine was appointed to the teaching staff of the Paris Conservatoire in 1952, as a professor of sight-reading. In 1969, she succeeded Olivier Messiaen as a professor of analysis. She composed prolifically throughout her life, and was acknowledged as one of the leading French composers of the twentieth century. 



Barraine was extremely sensitive to contemporary social and political events, and her creative process was intricately linked to her personal Humanistic and humanitarian beliefs and reactions to the tumultuous upheavals of the twentieth century. She was so affected by the horror of the Second World War that she was unable to compose throughout the duration of the Occupation. Despite the raw emotional context, and content, of her music, Barraine’s works – with the exception of the serial Musique rituelle (1966-7), inspired by the Tibetan Book of the Dead – remain firmly grounded within a tonal musical language, display her solid technical craft, and are cast within vigorous formal structures. 



Barraine’s early musical development was closely nurtured by her teacher, Paul Dukas. Like Dukas, her paternal family was also Jewish, and this formed an important cultural bond between them. Her Deux preludes et fugues pour orgue (1928), based upon the melodies of the traditional Jewish prayer ‘Blessed are you, our God’ and psalms 114 and 116, bore the dedication ‘Respectful homage to my master Paul Dukas’. She also contributed the short piano piece ‘Hommage à Paul Dukas’ to Le tombeau de Dukas (1936, intended to pay tribute to Dukas, who had died in May 1935). Barraine established her reputation in 1930 with her symphonic variations Harald Harfagard, after Heinrich Heine, which was the first of many works to draw on a literary source. Barraine’s compositional tendency to respond to the times in which she lived was firmly developed before the Second World War. Her orchestral work Pogromes (1933), after the poem by André Spire, was written in reaction to the rise of Hitler and Nazism. Her Second Symphony (1938) is entitled Voïna (Russian for ‘war’), and reflects her unease over the ascent of Fascism and Anti-Semitism, and the imminence of World War Two.



The years directly following the war were particularly fecund for Barraine, and the subjects that she chose for musical commentary continued to reveal her sensitive and Humanistic concerns. In 1944, her cantata Avis, after a poem by Paul Eluard, was dedicated to the memory of Georges Dudach, who had been shot by the Germans. Her orchestral variations Song koï ou le fleuve rouge (1945), meanwhile, were inspired by the Vietnamese struggle for independence from the French. Barraine returned to the cantata – the genre which had first brought her musical prestige when she won the prix de Rome in 1929 – and completed several works in this genre between 1950 and 1960, such as Les cinq plaies, La cantate du vendredi saint, Christine, and Les paysans. Her position on the faculty at the Paris Conservatoire inspired a number of works, such as the Suite juive for violin and piano (1951) and La boîte de pandore for piano (1954-5), which were written for use by her students. she was also an accomplished composer for the screen, and collaborated on several french films in the period directly following world war two, notably with the filmmaker Jean Grémillon, with whom she collaborated on Le printemps de la liberté (1948) and Pattes blanches (1951). 



Selected Works



1928		Deux preludes et fugues pour orgue

		Dedicated to Paul Dukas 

1929		La vierge guerriere

		Winning prix de Rome cantata for orchestra, chorus, and vocal soloists



1930		Harald Harfagard

		Symphonic Variations after Heinrich Heine (made Barraine’s name)



1931		Symphony no. 1

		Envoi de Rome



1933		Pogromes

		Orchestral music after André Spire 



1938		Symphony no. 2

		subtitled voïna (russian, ‘war’)



1944		Avis

		for chorus and orchestra, after paul eluard



1944		Poesie ininterrompue

		cantata after paul eluard



1945		Song koï ou le fleuve rouge

		orchestral variations inspired by the vietneamese struggle for independence



1948		Pattes blanches

		film score (directed by jean grémillon)



1950		La chanson du mal-aime

		ballet after guillaume apollinaire



1950		Claudine a l’ecole

		ballet after colette



1966-7		Musique rituelle

		for organ, gong, and xylorimba, inspired by the tibetan book of the dead; 

		(barraine’s only serial composition).



1977		De premier mai en premier mai

		for unaccompanied voices, after paul eluard.

Further reading:

 (Bourin)

(Ourgandjian)