
Jonathan Wallis

Rauschenberg, Robert (1925-2008)
Robert Rauschenberg (Milton Ernest Rauschenberg) was an American artist who
pioneered new approaches to art prototypical of the Pop Art movement and
postmodernism.  Born 22 October 1925 in Port Arthur, Texas, Rauschenberg
attended the Kansas City Art Institute and the Acadmie Julien in Paris.
From 1948-1952, while attending sessions at Black Mountain College in North
Carolina, Rauschenberg studied under the BAUHAUS painter JOSEF ALBERS and
the musical composer JOHN CAGE, both of whom became important influences.
The experimental approaches encouraged at Black Mountain College informed
Rauschenbergs artistic philosophy and broadened his practice to include
dance-theatre and performance.
In the 1950s, while living in New York City, Rauschenberg began
incorporating vernacular materials into his paintings including newspapers,
textiles and found objects. Experimenting with conceptual strategies and
motivated by a Cage-inspired aesthetic, Rauschenberg disregarded the
established hierarchies of modern art concerning medium specificity and
visual subject matter. By the mid-1950s he was making work that
incorporated both two and three-dimensional materials, creating a form of
assemblage known as combines, of which Monogram (1959) is a famous
example. Both painting and sculpture, the combines evidenced the artists
innovative use of collage, emphasizing the relationship of images and
objects to language. In the early 1960s, Rauschenberg produced a series of
silkscreened paintings responding to post-war American life and the
ubiquity of mass media. The silkscreen paintings furthered his artistic
turn away from the iconic experience of modern art exemplified by ABSTRACT
EXPRESSIONISM.
Rauschenbergs work is often alternatively labelled neo-Dada or proto-
Pop, the former for its affinity to the work of MARCEL DUCHAMP and collage
techniques of KURT SCHWITTERS, and the latter since his artistic vocabulary
predicts that of Pop art. Along with his contemporary JASPER JOHNS, critics
cite Rauschenbergs contributions as crucial to the development and
reception of postmodern art in the late twentieth century.  Rauschenberg
lived and worked in New York City and Captiva Island, Florida until his
death on 12 May 2008.

References and further reading
Hopps, W. and Davidson, S. (1997) Robert Rauschenberg: A Retrospective. New
York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
Joseph, B. (2007) Random Order: Robert Rauschenberg and the Neo-Avant-
Garde. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Joseph, B., ed. (2002). Robert Rauschenberg (October Files). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Krauss, R. (1974) Rauschenberg and the Materialized Image, Artforum 13
(4): 41-43.
Steinberg, L. (1972) Other Criteria in Other Criteria: Confrontations
with Twentieth Century Art, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 55-91.
[pic]
Monogram, 1955-59. Mixed mediums with taxidermy goat, rubber tire and
tennis ball, ca. 42 x 63 x 65 in., Moderna Museet, Stockholm



