

Charles Reznikoff was a poet, prose writer, and playwright whose work significantly contributed to American modernism. Drawing on his heritage as a New York City Jewish-American, Reznikoff, like his fellow ‘Objectivists’ Louis Zukofsky and George Oppen, used the resources of modernist poetry—spare lines, suppression of rhetoric, and attention to daily life—to explore Jewish history as well as the American urban experience. Particularly in works like Testimony (1965) and Holocaust (1975), Reznikoff relied upon his legal training to establish the poet as a witness, one who offers an account without judgment or praise.

Charles Reznikoff was a poet, prose writer, and playwright whose work significantly contributed to American modernism. Drawing on his heritage as a New York City Jewish-American, Reznikoff, like his fellow ‘Objectivists’ Louis Zukofsky and George Oppen, used the resources of modernist poetry—spare lines, suppression of rhetoric, and attention to daily life—to explore Jewish history as well as the American urban experience. Particularly in works like Testimony (1965) and Holocaust (1975), Reznikoff relied upon his legal training to establish the poet as a witness, one who offers an account without judgment or praise. In his own words, the objectivist poet ‘does not write directly about his feelings but about what he sees and hears, [. . .] restricted almost to the testimony of a witness in a court of law’. Because of these many influences, Reznikoff’s poetry offers a unique hybrid, moral, historical, and testimonial modernism.



Reznikoff was born in Brooklyn, New York, to a Russian Jewish immigrant family. His parents were working class, and for much of Charles’s life they ran a hat manufacturing business. While attending public high school he developed an interest in poetry. After a year studying journalism at the University of Missouri, Reznikoff decided to attend law school at New York University. Although he received his degree and passed the state bar exam, Reznikoff soon left private practice. He pursued graduate study in law at Columbia University, eventually leaving to work in his parent’s business. For the rest of his life, Reznikoff earned a living through various occupations, focusing much of his energy on his writing, always his first commitment. His legal training significantly influenced his work, not only informing his emphasis on witness but also granting him access to the documentary material that would make up Testimony. 



In 1918, Reznikoff self-published his first book of poetry, and would continue to publish regularly for the rest of his life. The early poems of Rhythms (1918) and Rhythms II (1919) reflect some of Reznikoff’s signature gestures: sparse, minimalist verses, usually untitled, which are poignant, at times ironic, and always attentive. Reznikoff’s ear for speech rhythms extracted poetic music from the language of daily life without dramatically transforming it. Additionally, his use of multiple perspectives in Rhythms II initiates his lifelong experiments with other voices, allowing the characters in his poems to offer their own testimony. The Jewish experience emerges as a clear focus in A Fourth Group of Verse (1921), becoming historical in later works like Israel (1929) and In Memoriam: 1933 (1934), in which Reznikoff retells major events from ancient Israel and the Jewish diaspora



In 1930, Reznikoff married journalist and Zionist Marie Syrkin, a lifelong partnership. In 1931, his new friend Louis Zukofsky edited a special issue of Poetry magazine, which featured Reznikoff, William Carlos Williams, George Oppen, and others. In this issue Zukofsky coined the phrase ‘Objectivist’. Reznikoff, Zukofsky, and George and Mary Oppen would go on to establish the Objectivist Press, which published Williams, Oppen, and Reznikoff himself.



Reznikoff’s late major works, the multi-volume Testimony: The United States (1885–1915), Recitative (1965) and Holocaust (1975) amplify and radicalize his poetics of witness. In the first of these works, the poet turns transcripts of U.S. court cases into verse, drawing the material from his work on a legal encyclopedia. The result is an alternative history of the United States, one that reveals daily violence, suffering, and conflict in painful detail. Reznikoff’s own experience as a Jewish-American perhaps prompts his attention to the racial tensions underlying that violence; a repeating section, entitled ‘Negroes’, has been called by Aldon Lynn Nielsen ‘the most substantial consideration given to black life by a white poet during the modernist period’. Reznikoff later used the same documentary approach with transcriptions from the Nuremberg and Eichmann trials, producing Holocaust.



Reznikoff’s influence on American poetry was not limited to the modernist period. As late as 1975, one year before his death by heart attack, he was interviewed by Susan Howe, a sign of his influence on Language poetry and other late century experimental movements.



Online Resources

Interview by Susan Howe <http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Reznikoff.php>

Further reading:

(Cooney, The Poems of Charles Reznikoff, 1918-1975)

(Cooney, Holocaust)

(Fredman)

(Hindus)