
RICHTER, Hans (b. 6 April 1888, Berlin, Germany; d. 1 February 1976,
Lacarno, Switzerland)

Hans  Richter  was  a  German  painter,  graphic  artist  and   experimental
filmmaker associated with a number of the  European  avant-garde  movements,
most notably Dadaism. After 1940 he moved to  the  United  States  where  he
continued to paint and make films.

Richters earliest artistic contacts were with the Blaue  Reiter  group  and
Cubism. In 1916 after being wounded and discharged from the army, he  joined
the Dada movement where he met Hans Arp, Marcel  Janco  and,  most  notably,
Viking Eggeling. Eggelings  influence  was  crucial,  since  he  introduced
Richter to orchestrations:  formal  experiments  similar  to  the  musical
counterpoint that sought  to  establish  relations  between  opposites  from
which the artistic object eventually  emerged.  Richter  would  apply  these
techniques to  Preludes  (1919)  -  a  series  of  black  and  white  scroll
paintings that aimed to create a sort of visual music.

As a filmmaker, Richter  is  best  known  for  two  short  black  and  white
experimental features: Rhythmus 21  (1921)  -  which  he  called  the  first
abstract film and Vormittagspuk [Ghosts Before Breakfast]  (1928).  Rhythmus
21 consists of a flow of flickering white squares and rectangles on a  black
background. The shapes echo one  another  and  the  surface  of  the  screen
itself. A more overtly Surrealist  work  ,  Vormittagspuk  uses  stop-motion
animation to craft a jocular, somewhat unsettling  atmosphere  where  flying
hats, rebellious bow ties and artful china disrupt the customary routine  of
a summer morning

References and Further reading:

Perlmutter, Ruth (1973) Dada Sine-ma Dada. Dada/Surrealism 3: 7-16.

Richter, Hans (1997) Dada: Art and Anti-Art. London: Thames & Hudson.

Paratextual material:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yZX6DdXhyU - Ghosts before Breakfast. Full
movie

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b972EQOOEoY - Rhythmus 21. Full movie

http://www.paradise2012.com/visualMusic/musima/index_files/prelude2.jpg -
One of Richters Preludes

Maria Ioni
Ryerson University

