
Contributor: Deborah Caplow

Ruiz, Antonio

Born: Texcoco, State of Mexico, 1897; Died: Mexico City, 1964

Antonio Ruiz, also known as El Corzo or El Corcito, after a famous Spanish
bullfighter, was during the 1920s to the1950s, primarily an easel painter.
His small, jewel-like paintings, finely executed in a nave style, show
influences from Surrealism, Northern Renaissance painting, New Objectivity,
and Mexican folk art. For his subjects Ruiz drew from Mexican history and
politics as well as everyday Mexican life, but he often added a magical
realist twist to his images. He produced very little, about four paintings
per year, and only sold three works during his lifetime. A number of his
paintings are now in the Museo de la Secretara de Hacienda y Crdito
Pblico (Museum of Ministry of Finance and Public Credit).  His paintings
are often satirical scenes of daily life in Mexico, sometimes with
dreamlike elements, absurd juxtapositions and incongruous proportions that
ally them with Surrealism. His most well-known work, El sueo de La
Malinche (The Dream of La Malinche), of 1939, portrays the indigenous woman
who acted as translator for Hernn Cortez and bore him a child; in this
image Ruiz makes a clear reference to the Conquest of Mexico and expresses
his awareness of the complexity of Mexicos history.
[pic]
Antonio Ruiz, Sueo de la Malinche (Dream of La Malinche), 1939, oil on
canvas, 11 7/8 x 15 3/4
http://chnm.gmu.edu/wwh/modules/lesson6/images/sources/ruizlarge.jpg

Ruiz came from an educated family, with a physician father and a pianist
mother, but orphaned at an early age, he had to make his own way in the
world. At the age of seventeen he entered the Escuela Nacional de Artes
Plasticas (National School of Fine Arts), known as the Academy of San
Carlos, and studied painting and drawing there from 1914 to 1916. He was
part of a generation of students that included artists Rufino Tamayo, Julio
Castellanos, Leopoldo Mndez, Carlos Mrida, and Miguel Covarrubias. The
teachers who most inspired him were Saturnino Herrn and Germn Gedovius.
After two years at the Academy he began to study architecture and worked as
a technical draftsman at the Ministry of Communications and Public
Services.

He taught drawing in primary schools in Mexico City from 1921 to 1925,
using the artistic theories of Adolfo Best Maugard, whose drawing method
was based on Pre-Columbian designs. In 1927 he married Merced Prez Correa
with whom he had two daughters; he lived quietly with his family in the
north of Mexico City for the rest of his life. From 1925 to 1927 he worked
in Hollywood for Universal Pictures as a set designer, and he later
designed sets in Mexico. In 1932 he was named professor at the Escuela
Superior de Ingenieria y Arquitectura at the Instituto Politcnico Nacional
(School of Engineering and Architecture at the National Polytechnical
Institute) and became professor of scenography and perspective at the
Academy of San Carlos in 1938. In 1942, with Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera,
Ruiz founded the Escuela de Pintura y Escultura (La Esmeralda) became
director of the school, and also taught painting there.

Ruiz worked with Miguel Covarrubias on six murals for the Golden Gate
International Exposition in San Francisco in 1939, and painted two other
murals in Mexico, in 1935 for the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Industria
Cinematogrfica (Union of Cinema Workers) (destroyed in 1948) and in the
Edificio Souza on the Paseo de la Reforma, on the theme of Ptolemy and
Copernicus. Other than these, and his many sets for films, plays and
ballets, he only painted small canvases.

Painter Roberto Montenegro called his images tarjetas, or post cards, due
to their small size and meticulous detail (many of them are 16 x 14  cm).
In spite of their innocent appearance, his paintings make ironic,
insightful comments on Mexican culture and society. El lider/orador (The
Orator) of 1939 portrays a tiny man standing on a wooden chair, haranguing
an audience of pumpkins, a witty reference to the demagoguery of the 1930s
and the impending war. This painting and Sueo de La Malinche were included
in the 1940 International Surrealist Exhibition in Mexico City. Other
images, such as the 1936 Desfile (Parade) and Carrera de cintas en Texcoco
(The Bicycle Race, Texcoco) of 1938, reflect Ruizs interest in Mexican
events and celebrations. His 1932 La billetera (The Lottery Vendor)
demonstrates his sympathy for the downtrodden; here a young mother carries
her child in her rebozo; her brown skin and the shawl identify her as an
indigenous woman. She stares despondently into space with a lottery ticket
in her hand. Ruiz introduced a touch of Surrealism here; on the wall hangs
an intricately detailed electrical box that resembles a small inquisitive
face. Verano (Summer), 1937, is a brilliant commentary on social inequality
and modernisation. In this image, a working-class couple stares at a store
window display of mannequins in bathing suits. The contrast between the two
worlds emphasises class and cultural divisions.

Ruiz created a few portraits: his 1923 Jess (Chucho) Bribiesca, displays
affinities with German Expressionism, with its distorted angular lines,
simplified composition and intense distillation of personality. Ruizs
joking Autoretrato (Self-Portrait) is a portrayal of the artist at his
easel. He depicted himself as a turkey, the mirror reflects a peacock, and
the painting he is creating portrays a bizarre bird collaged from brightly
colored, Cubist-inspired shapes. The artist also satirised figures in the
art world, as in his 1938 Serenata (Serenade), in which he depicted the
composer Silvestre Revueltas, a legendary alcoholic, shirtless and
disheveled, lying on the ground in a drunken stupor next to three
musicians, and in his 1952 El Hroe (The Hero) a scene of the pompous
inauguration of a monument, with its portraits of known personages,
including Diego Rivera. These images demonstrate that while an active
member of the circle of prominent Mexican artists, he stood apart from it,
and from this position was free to criticize. In spite of the high quality
of his work, his output was small and he remains less known than others.


References and Further Reading:

Antonio Ruiz, El Corcito, 1895-1964 (1987). Mexico City, CENEDIAP.

Debroise, O. (1984) Antonio El Corcito Ruiz, 1895-1964. Exhibition
catalogue. Toluca, Mexico: Museo de Bellas Artes de Toluca.

Helm, M. (1941) Modern Mexican Painters New York: Harper and Brothers, 148-
152 .

Mexico: Splendors of Thirty Centuries (1990). New York: Metropolitan Museum
of Art, 655-660.

Ruiz, A. and R. Usigli (1966?)  Exposicin homenaje Antonio M. Ruiz: Museo
del Palacio de Bellas Artes Mexico City: Instituto Nacional de Bellas
Artes.

List of Works:

Jess (Chucho) Bribiesca, 1923, oil on canvas.
La billetera (The Lottery Vendor, 1932, oil on canvas.
Verano (Summer) , 1937, oil on canvas.
Desfile (Parade), 1936, oil on canvas.
Carrera de cintas en Texcoco (The Bicycle Race, Texcoco), 1938, oil on
canvas.
El lider/orador (The Orator), 1939, oil on canvas.
El sueo de La Malinche (The Dream of La Malinche), 1939, oil on canvas.
El Hroe (The Hero), 1952, oil on canvas.
