
Beach, Sylvia (Nancy Woodbridge)
b. 1887, Baltimore, MD; d. 1962, Paris, France
Bookseller and publisher

      The American expatriate, who renamed herself Sylvia as an adolescent,
is best known as the owner of the Shakespeare and Company bookstore,
located first at 8 rue Dupuytren and moved, in 1921, to 12 rue de lOdon
in the La Rive Gauche of Paris River Seine.  The popular bookstore and
lending library was a point of convergence for many modernist writers and
artists in Paris thriving arts community  of whom, many were also
expatriates, seeking the freedom of Paris liberal social mores.

      Beach spent much of her youth distancing herself from a household made
uneasy by the tense marriage of her mother, Eleanor Thomazine Orbison, and
father, Sylvester Beach, a Presbyterian minister who served several
parishes in New England, including the prominent Princeton, New Jersey
community.  Her early refusal of material wealth was often at odds with her
fathers attempts to gain social status among affluent Princeton
parishioners.  However, Beach found some hope for her ambition of becoming
an independent woman during a year spent in Paris in 1902, during which her
father served as Associate Pastor of the American Church of Paris (Fitch
1983, p. 24).  This period helped develop Beachs love for Paris, its
artists, and its liberal atmosphere.

      In 1916, after returning to America for almost fifteen years, Beach
set out again for Europe with her mother, briefly stopping in Madrid before
settling in Paris in 1917.  Following her service in varied war efforts,
Beachs interest in French literature helped situate her in the citys
avant-garde Left Bank community.  A year after her initial arrival, Beachs
life took yet another turn when she found herself standing outside a small
French language bookshop owned by Adrienne Monnier.

      The relationship that developed between Beach and Monnier was
immediately defined by mutual respect and admiration.  Both women possessed
a love for literature and soon found that they each complemented the other,
both enjoying the knowledge the other provided in regard to the writers
from their respective nations.  However, companionship was only a portion
of what Beachs partner brought to her life.  On November 19, 1919, with
the help of Monnier and a three thousand dollar loan from her mother
Eleanor, Beach first opened the doors to Shakespeare & Company, her
American bookstore and lending library - a plan that she had maintained
since adolescence and had originally intended to establish in New York
(Fitch 1983, pp. 32-40).  Almost immediately, Shakespeare & Company
provided a hub for many of the citys Modernist artists and writers.
Monniers friends quickly ensured the small bookstores unforeseen success,
enlisting memberships from such names as Ernest Hemingway, Andr Gide,
Andr Maurois, Robert McAlmon, Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, and James Joyce.



                  Beachs work with Joyce, the writer that she claimed as
the most illustrious member of the Shakespeare and Company family, has
contributed similarly in establishing her role in literary history (Beach
1959, p. 40).  In the spring of 1918, after a halt in the serial
publication of Joyces Ulysses, Beach requested that Shakespeare and
Company be allowed to publish the novels first single-volume edition.  As
a result, Beach made history as the private publisher of what many consider
the most important novel of the twentieth century.

      However, both Ulysses and Joyce proved to be trying projects.  The
novels progress was plagued by Joyces failing vision, and Beach often
found herself exhausting the coffers of Shakespeare and Company to
accommodate the authors living expenses.  Nonetheless, on 2 February,
1922, Beach presented the first copy of the iconic, blue volume to Joyce as
a birthday gift (Beach 1959, p. 84).  Soon afterwards, regular sales copies
were released.  Beach continued both her business and friendship with the
author until his death in 1941.

      The doors of Shakespeare and Company were ordered shut in December of
the same year when a Nazi officer was reportedly denied Beachs only copy
of Joyces Finnegans Wake (Fitch 1983, p.393).  Regardless, Beach
maintained her role as a prominent supporter of the Paris literary scene,
and she was instrumental in the research conducted by Joyce scholar Richard
Ellmann.    Exhibits of Beachs 1920s mementos have been celebrated in
exhibits across Europe and the United States, and in 1958, her Joyce
collection was purchased by the University of Buffalo, the same university
that presented her with an honorary doctorate of letters the following year
(Fitch 1983, p. 413).   Nonetheless, despite her later returns to the
United States and the suicide of Monnier in 1955, Beach remained in Paris
until her own death in 1962.









                                 References

Beach, S 1959, Shakespeare and Company, Harcourt, Brace , and Company, New
York.

Fitch, NR 1983, Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation: A History of Literary
      Paris in the Twenties and Thirties, WW Norton and Company, New York.

Freund, G n.d. A Portrait of the Owner. [online image] Available at:
      <http://www.towntopics.com/mar1605/art.jpg> (Accessed 15 August 2012).

Freund, G n.d. Untitled, [online image] Available at:
      <http://www.themodernword.com/joyce/JJ_shakespeare.jpg> (Accessed 16
      August 2012).

RT, 1962, The Woman Who Published Ulysses, Self Portrait. [online video]
      February 1962. Available at:
      http://www.euscreen.eu/play.jsp?id=EUS_EF6EBE131B724A5B9D5705901B23B93C
      > (Accessed 16 August 2012).

                         Further Reading and Viewing

Joyce, James. James Joyces Letters to Sylvia Beach: 1921  1940, ed.
      Melissa Banta and Oscar A. Silverman. Bloomington: Indiana University
      Press, 1987.

Paris Was a Woman. Directed by Greta Schiller. 1996. New York: Zeitgeist
      Films, 2003. DVD.

Graham, E, n.d. The Modernism Lab at Yale University: Sylvia Beach.
      [online] Available at:
      <http://modernism.research.yale.edu/wiki/index.php/Sylvia_Beach>
      (Accessed 15 August 2012).



-----------------------
1. Sylvia Beach in Shakespeare & Company (A Portrait of the Owner, n.d.).



2. Joyce and Beach Outside of Shakespeare and Company (Untitled, 1925).





