
PIERRE SCHAEFFER (1910-1995)
John Dack

PIERRE SCHAEFFER was a French music theorist, composer, writer,
administrator, broadcaster and commentator on media. Born 14th August 1910,
in Nancy, France, died 19th August 1995, at les Milles near Aix en
Provence. Both his parents were musicians but after studies at Suplec
(cole Suprieure d'lectricit et des Tlcommunications ) Schaeffer
became a telecommunications engineer and worked in Strasbourg before taking
a position in 1936 at the head office of the national radio in Paris. He
served as a telecommunications officer in 1939 and was demobilised in 1940.
After working in various cities during the Vichy government he became in
1942 director of the Studio dEssai at the RDF (Radiodiffusion Franaise)
in Paris. This experimental studio eventually became the Groupe de
Recherches Musicales in 1958. Schaeffers activities embraced many fields
relating to modern communications media. His comments on the effects of the
rise of technological mediation in audio-visual communication have been
influential in sociological studies of the media and the history of ideas.
One of his most enduring legacies is the music genre known as MUSIQUE
CONCRTE. The theories and techniques which developed from MUSIQUE CONCRTE
continue to influence many contemporary musicians who apply them to the
sample-based techniques of digital technology.

PIERRE SCHAEFFER
PIERRE SCHAEFFER described himself as an crivain. The range of his
writings is considerable, including not only fiction but also numerous
articles, essays and books. His entire working life was spent in various
administrative roles within the national broadcasting system. Thus, it is
unsurprising that many of his writings were devoted to the increasing
cultural significance of what he called the relay arts such as radio and
cinema. In addition to administration Schaeffer was also a broadcaster,
composer and music theorist. Schaeffers multi-faceted career is
characterized by his ability to combine practical and theoretical
interests. This entirely consistent with his assertion that humans exhibit
tendencies of both making/doing and thinking (homo faber and homo sapiens).


Schaeffers early education was in Nancy in the region of Lorraine, France.
His parents were musicians, his father was a violinist and his mother was a
singer. His devotion to Catholicism, his literary interests and musical
sensibilities were of crucial importance in shaping his future career. He
was awarded a degree in engineering from SUPLEC in Paris. Schaeffer played
the cello and for a time attended the classes of Nadia Boulanger but
decided against a musical career to purge himself (as he wrote later) of
his Oedipus complex (Schaeffer, 1977: 77). In 1934 he started work at the
regional office of telecommunications in Strasbourg. In 1936 he joined the
Radio dEtat (national radio) in Paris and was able to combine both
practical work and theoretical knowledge whilst installing a sound system
at the Opera. This illustrates a preoccupation of Schaeffer: an active
relationship between technology and the arts. He served as a
telecommunications officer in 1939 and, when decommissioned, helped to
found the short-lived but influential group Jeune France whose function was
to organize events in all fields of the arts such as theatre, music,
architecture and fine art. During the early years of the Vichy government
he worked in various cities in France returning to Paris in 1942 as chief
engineer of the national radio. Here he attempted to recruit staff who,
like him, combined both administrative and artistic skills. In the same
year he became director of the Studio dEssai which became a clandestine
centre for French resistance (Schaeffer was to broadcast the call to arms
during the liberation of Paris in 1945). At the Studio dEssai his multiple
talents as writer and technician were exploited in productions of
radiophonic art. Between 1942-43 he produced, wrote and acted in La
Coquille  Plantes with music by Claude Arrieu which was broadcast in
1946. This was a decisive event in Schaeffers career as the conditions of
the radio medium inspired him to develop MUSIQUE CONCRTE. The Studio
dEssai (later the Club dEssai) was re-named GRMC (Groupe de Recherches de
Musique Concrte) in 1951 and later the GRM (Groupe de Recherches
Musicales) in 1958. This final change of title was more than a trivial re-
naming. It indicated a determination to apply research in MUSIQUE CONCRTE
to music generally. Schaeffer abandoned composition after the Etude aux
Objets in 1959 and concentrated on writing though he composed the Le
Tridre Fertile in 1975. He was appointed associate professor at the Paris
conservatoire from 1968 to 1980 to teach electroacoustic music. As part of
the reorganization of the ORTF (Office de Radiodiffusion-Tlvision
Franaise)  he helped to establish the INA (Institut national de
laudiovisuel) in 1974. The GRM is now part of this organization.

MUSIQUE CONCRTE
The medium of the radio was central to Schaeffers aesthetic formation. It
exemplifies the acousmatic situation where sounds are heard without
visual confirmation of a source. This led to Schaeffers belief that all
sounds could be potential musical material if their concrete totality could
be examined to determine every constituent feature. After such scrutiny
certain characteristics could be abstracted from sound objects and, if
placed in a (recorded) composition, new musical vales would emerge. In
order to hear the sound repeatedly they were recorded and analysed by means
of reduced listening and the closed groove. Thus, composers should work
directly on sounds in the studio rather than writing a pre-conceived score
which is subsequently realized by a performer. Schaeffer abandoned the term
MUSIQUE CONCRTE in 1958 but its work methods continue to inform
contemporary electroacoustic music even though the technology is digital
rather than analogue. Schaeffer gave an account of his early experiments in
A la recherche dune musique concrte (1952). A more thorough account of
his theories and their general musical application was offered in the
Trait des objets musicaux (1966). Schaeffers Programme de la recherche
musicale as presented in the Trait consists of five stages: typology
(sound classification), morphology (detailed sound description),
characterology (arranging sounds in families or genres), analysis
(determining if characteristics might be arranged in scales) and
synthesis (creating new sounds guided by analysis). This programme can be
applied to music generally. It is noteworthy that MUSIQUE CONCRTE, even in
its earliest stages, did not simply use a vocabulary of unmodified real-
world sounds. Abstraction from the concrete was the ultimate goal.
Furthermore, MUSIQUE CONCRTE is frequently compared unfavourably with the
apparently more rigorous methods of serial composition at the Westdeutscher
Rundfunk studio in Cologne in the 1950s. Schaeffer had no objection to
electronic sounds as such (though he found them uninteresting). His
objection to elektronische Musik was that the work methods adopted by
serial composers valorized pre-conceived schemes which assumed a priori how
sound characteristics would be abstracted. By contrast, composers at the
Studio dEssai were encouraged to work directly with sounds, verifying
results by perception. The ideological misunderstanding between these two
approaches was exemplifed by the reception of the concrete opera Orphe 53
at Donaueschingen. The serial agenda of many in the audience prevented an
appreciation of the works poetic qualities.

SCHAEFFERS LEGACY
After his retirement Pierre Schaeffer appeared to repudiate much of his
musical research claiming he was a good researcher rather than a musician
(Hodgkinson, 2001). Nevertheless, like many important thinkers the full
consequences of his theories have been left to later generations. In
addition, Schaeffers reputation as a media-theorist should not be
underestimated. He had a vast experience of different forms of media and
communications and believed the relay arts demonstrated a movement from the
concrete to the abstract. By contrast with the positivist foundations of
Mac Luhans theories, Schaeffer subsumed his formidable technical expertise
within thoughtful examinations of the perceiving subjects relationship to
the received message. This approach to an interpretation of the media using
the dualisms of abstract/concrete and subject/object are consistent with
Schaeffers post-Romantic tendencies and provide contemporary thought with
many unique insights.

References and further reading
Hodgkinson, T. (2001) An interview with Pierre Schaeffer in The book of
Music and Nature Middletown CT: Wesleyan University Press (This interview
took place in 1986. In several places Schaeffer expresses doubts about his
achievements in developing a new kind of music practice)
Schaeffer, P. (1952) A la recherche dune musique concrte Paris: Editions
du Seuil (This book is a journal by Schaeffer outlining the discovery of
musique concrte. The final section of the book sets out a concrete music
theory)
Schaeffer, P. (1966) Trait des objets musicaux Paris: Editions du Seuil
(The Trait is a detailed exposition of Schaeffers Programme of Musical
Research and is applicable to much contemporary musical thought)
Schaeffer, P. (2012) In Search of a Concrete Music Berkeley: University of
California Press (trans. C.North, J.Dack) (An English translation of
Schaeffers book from 1952)
Schaeffer, P. (1970) Machines  communiquer Paris: Editions du Seuil (This
two volume work contains autobiographical information as well as
Schaeffers thoughts about mass media)
Schaeffer, P. (1977) De la musique concrte a la musique mme La Revue
Musicale 303-305 Paris: Richard-Masse (Many of the articles in this special
edition have been reissued by Mmoire du Livre in 2002)
Dallet, S. (1996) Pierre Schaeffer: Itinraires dun chercheur Paris: CERPS
(This book has a detailed biography of Schaeffer as well as a thorough
listing of his works. It is a bilingual edition)

List of works
Schaeffer, P. (1948) Cinq tudes de bruits Pierre Schaeffer - luvre
musicale (2010) ina editions 6027 (These five studies are the earliest
musique concrte compositions. The first tude is the Etude aux chemins de
fer)
Schaeffer, P. & Henry, P. (1950) Symphonie pour un homme seul Pierre
Schaeffer - luvre musicale (2010) ina editions 6028 (The Symphonie was an
early collaboration with Pierre Henry)
Schaeffer, P. (1958) Etude aux allures Pierre Schaeffer - luvre musicale
(2010) ina editions 6029 (This etude promotes allure, which is a
generalized vibrato, to the level of a musical value)
Schaeffer, P. (1959) Etude aux objets Pierre Schaeffer - luvre musicale
(2010) ina editions 6027 (there are five movements to this etude. The
sounds object are limited in number and are developed in the manner of
variations)
