

Schiaparelli, Elsa (1890-1973)

Schiaparelli, Elsa Luisa Maria

Elsa Luisa Maria Schiaparelli was an avantgarde fashion designer extremely influential in the 1930s. Born in Rome into a well-to-do family, an early mésalliance with William de Wendt de Kerlo forced her to live in poverty in London and New York until she moved to Paris where she met avantgarde artists and – without ever having learned to sew - began her career in fashion. In contrast to Coco Chanel’s modernist simplicity, Schiaparelli indulged in aesthetic exaggerations and a profusion of fantastic decorations like luxurious embroideries (realized by François Lesage [1929-2011]), often inspired by surrealist art.

Elsa Luisa Maria Schiaparelli was an avantgarde fashion designer extremely influential in the 1930s. Born in Rome into a well-to-do family, an early mésalliance with William de Wendt de Kerlo forced her to live in poverty in London and New York until she moved to Paris where she met avantgarde artists and–without ever having learned to sew–began her career in fashion. In contrast to Coco Chanel’s modernist simplicity, Schiaparelli indulged in aesthetic exaggerations and a profusion of fantastic decorations like luxurious embroideries (realized by François Lesage [1929-2011]), often inspired by surrealist art. She transformed Salvador Dalí’s paintings into a dress with drawers; a printed silk ‘Tears Dress’ (part of her 1938 ‘Circus’ collection; http://bit.ly/NxF0Oq) is considered a precursor of twentieth century punk styles. Schiaparelli loved trompe-l’œil-effects; her career’s starting point was a black knitted sweater with a trompe-l’œil white bow (1927). A hat looked like a lady’s shoe turned upside down; a glove wore painted finger nails. Schiaparelli designed theatrical fashion jewellery and devised vibrant new colors like ‘shocking pink’. In 1937, she presented her perfume ‘Shocking’ in a provocative flacon formed by surrealist artist Leonor Fini (1907-1996) as female torso inspired by actress Mae West’s curvaceuous body. Schiaparelli walked the tightrope between art and consumerism. The combination of impeccably modern cuts inspired by architectural principles with striking decorative elements defines Schiaparelli’s modernity. Her fashion house closed down in 1954 when her witty and fantastic style was no longer to date; that year, she also published her memoir Shocking Life.



File: TearsDress.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: bit.ly/NxF0Oq



Further reading:

(Koda and Bolton)

(Lehnert)

(Schiaparelli)

(White)