
Bruno Schulz (1892-1942)

      Bruno Schulz was a writer and visual artist born in Drohobycz, Poland
(today, part of the Ukraine). Under the occupation, Schulz was protected
by a German officer, until another military official killed him out of
spite.  Along with his friend Witold Gombrowicz and their contemporary
Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz, Schulz represents the high tide of Polish
modernism.
      Schulz combined Polish, German, and Jewish literary traditions in his
works.  His work has often been likened to that of Franz Kafka, who also
wrote from a marginal position and explored the enchantments and snares of
a culturally nomadic existence. Yet Schulzs writings display warmth absent
from Kafkas oeuvre.  In many tales, my father is the central figurethe
true hero, whose exploits the narrator recounts.  The old man hatches zany
schemes, expatiates at length on his idiosyncratic philosophy, and engages
in odd exploits that endear him to his son.
      The images in Schulzs stories whirl, eddy, and flow.  His
narrativeswhich are episodic and often eschew the dictate that works have
a clearly delineated beginning, middle, and endappear as so many discrete
parts of a larger mosaic.  The first-person narrator commonly adopts a tone
of wonder and bemusement in the face of what he describes, yet the overall
effect is one of immersion in a foreign, otherworldly element.
Consequently, Schulzs dreamlike world is also full of terror.
      Sanatorium Pod Klepsydr (Sanatorium Under the Sign of the
Hourglass), a story providing the title of the secondand lastcollection
of tales that Schulz published (1937), describes the real stakes in the
narrators flights of fancy as clouds gathered over Eastern Europe.  Here,
the narrators ailing father is convalescing in a shadowy institution,
where, the boy suspects, dark secrets lurk.  The sanatorium is ostensibly
devoted to the welfare of patients, yet the narrator experiences an acute
sense of isolation and emptiness in its halls.  The staff is observing
forms without, in fact, doing anything.  At best, what is happening at the
Sanatorium signifies neglectat worst, malice.  Either way, the masquerade
cannot be innocent.  Toward the end, the narrator and his fatherwho has
grown small and thin and now stands two heads shorter than his
sonleave the building for a walk.  Outside, terror grips the city.
Witnessing the tumult, the father parts with his son, telling him that he,
the father, must leave the sanatorium and mind his shop; the son is to
remain inside.  Ironically, the safest place is the center of command from
which the darkness engulfing the city spreads.  The fathers dismissal of
the son is an act of love: the old man does not want anything bad to happen
to his child.
      From the eerie calm at the eye of the storm, Schulz saw the sad end
of his own existenceand the lives of millions of others.  His last work, a
novel entitled The Messiah, is presumed lost forever.

Key Works

Sklepy cynamonowe (1934, translated as: The Street of Crocodiles, 1963 [the
original title is Cinnamon Shops])
Sanatorium Pod Klepsydr (1937, Sanatorium Under the Sign of the Hourglass,
1988)

References and further reading

Banks, Brian R. (2006) Muse & Messiah: The Life, Imagination & Legacy of
Bruno Schulz, London: Inkermen Press.
Ficowski, Jerzy (2004), Regions of the Great Heresy: A Biographical
Portrait, New York: W. W. Norton.
