
The Seashell and the Clergyman  [La Coquille et le clergyman]

Jenelle Troxell


                                    [pic]

                       The Seashell and the Clergyman

                                    [pic]

The Seashell and the Clergyman  [La Coquille et le clergyman, 1926] serves
as an early example of surrealist cinema. It was directed by French
Impressionist filmmaker and theorist Germaine Dulac from a scenario by poet
and dramatist Antonin Artaud. The films inaugural screening at Studio des
Ursulines on February 9, 1928 gave rise to passionate outbursts from
members of the surrealist community, relating primarily to Dulacs
allegedly unsatisfactory treatment of Artauds material. This legendary
incident in many ways underscores Artaud and Dulacs torrid and generative
collaboration. Explicitly non-narrative, the film makes use of a wealth of
cinematic devices (dissolves, superimpositions, masks, soft focus, unusual
camera angles, slow motion, and repetition) to explore the clergymans
struggle with eroticism and desire. While The Smiling Madame Bedeut (1922),
Dulacs previous film, induces the spectator to identify with Mme Bedeut,
whose subjective consciousness generates the dreams and fantasies that
comprise the film, The Seashell and the Clergyman dispenses with the notion
of character and attempts a direct exploration of unconscious psychic
processes. Eschewing narrative causation, the film follows an associative
dream logic and prefigures Dulacs later works of pure cinema [Cinma pur],
or films conceived according to the rules of visual music. Suspicious of
the films lack of narrative progression and libidinal circulation of
images, the British Board of Film Censors banned The Seashell and the
Clergyman in 1927, describing it as so cryptic as to be almost
meaningless, and concluding, if there is meaning, it is doubtless
objectionable.

http://www.ubu.com/film/dulac_coquille.html

References:

Abel, R. (1988) French Film Theory and Criticism: A History/Anthology,1907-
      1939. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bordwell, D. (1980) French Impressionist Cinema: Film Culture, Film Theory,
      and Film Style. New York: Arno Press.
Dozoretz, W. (1979) Dulac Versus Artaud. Wide Angle 3.1: 46-53.
Flitterman-Lewis, S. (1990) To Desire Differently: Feminism and the French
      Cinema. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
---. (1996) The Image and the Spark: Dulac and Artaud Reviewed. Dada and
      Surrealist Film. Ed. Rudolf E. Kuenzli. Boston: MIT Press.
Williams, T. M. (2007) Beyond Impressions: The Life and Films of Germaine
      Dulac from Aesthetics to Politics. Diss U. of California Los Angeles.
---. Sensations and Dreams: The Life and Films of Germaine Dulac. Urbana-
Champaign: University of Illinois Press (forthcoming).
