
Secessionist Movement

The Secessionist Movement is the name applied to a range of artistic
splinter groups that began to emerge in the 1890s.  Objecting to what they
saw as the inherent conservatism of established academies, these groups
seceded or broke away from their parent institutions and launched their
own, avant-garde approach.  The first Secessionist group appeared in Munich
in 1892 under the leadership of Franz von Stuck and Wilhelm Trbner.
Among the most influential Secessionist groups was that founded in Vienna
by a coalition of artists, architects and designers who resigned from the
Association of Austrian Artists in 1897.  United by the urge to elevate the
applied arts to the status of fine art, members of the Vienna Secession
produced exquisite work across a spectrum of creative disciplines.  The
aesthetic initially resembled the curvilinear ART NOUVEAU style, but it
increasingly moved towards abstraction and geometric simplicity.  The
founding of the Vienna Secession thus marked the beginning of a new
artistic era in Austria and heralded the birth of the Modern Movement.
The first president of the Vienna Secession was the artist GUSTAV KLIMT,
who designed an exhibition poster depicting the helmeted head of Athene;
this image was soon adopted as the symbol of the group.  Klimts paintings
explored the mysteries of femininity and were embellished with sequins and
beads, producing a highly decorative effect that echoed Secessionist
achievements in interior design.  Other participants included the
architects Josef Hoffmann and Joseph Maria Olbrich and the designer Koloman
Moser, who described the group as a youthful Club of Seven.  The
architect OTTO WAGNER is widely recognised as a member of the Secession,
but he was not a founding member.  The languid, intoxicating style was
propounded in the groups journal, Ver Sacrum (Sacred Spring), which was
published from 1898 to 1903.
[pic]

Joseph Maria Olbrich, Secession Hall, 1898

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/25/Secession_Vienna_June_200
6_007.jpg

The Vienna Secession was acclaimed for its pioneering exhibitions, which
were held in a purpose-built pavilion designed by Olbrich (1897).  This
took the form of a pristine white temple crowned with a cupola of golden
leaves.  Moser contributed a lavish decorative scheme including sinister
Gorgons with writhing snakes.  Above the entrance was carved the motto, To
every age its art and to art its freedom.  The pavilion exhibited works by
many of the most progressive artists in Europe.  In particular, the Vienna
Secession championed the Scottish architect and designer CHARLES RENNIE
MACKINTOSH and his fellow members of the Glasgow Four, who were largely
unappreciated in Britain.  The ethereal spaces they created for the Eighth
Secession exhibition in 1900, based on calm geometric lines and intense
passages of abstract decoration, had a profound influence in Europe.
Hoffmann was enraptured by Mackintoshs designs and his subsequent work
embraced a rigid geometry of straight lines and squares, so much so that it
earned him the epithet Quadratl Hoffmann (Square Hoffmann).  A prime
example is the Kubus Armchair (1910), which multiplies the form of a basic
cube to create a powerful geometric design and an early exemplar of
Modernism.

Much of the early Secessionist work has the lyrical beauty of Art Nouveau,
but some exponents embraced the new spirit of modernity and developed a
more functionalist approach.  The architect ADOLF LOOS advocated a stripped-
down, rational style appropriate for the modern age.  His design and
writings rehearsed many of the founding principles of Modernism.  For
example, his provocatively-titled essay Ornament and Crime (1908) states:
The evolution of culture marches with the elimination of ornament from
useful objects.  Such statements anticipated the emergence of the austere,
minimalist aesthetic of Modernism.
The work of Otto Wagner illuminates this transition.  His Majolika Haus in
Vienna (1898) has a rectilinear faade embellished with sinuous lines of
glazed ceramic tile.  A shift towards functionalism is apparent in his
Karlsplats Station in Vienna (1900), which consists of marble slabs mounted
onto a steel framework.  Similarly, his Post Office Savings Bank (1904-6)
is composed of marble slabs fixed with aluminium bolts onto a brick
structure. In an early demonstration of the Modernist principal of
structural honesty, the bolt heads were left visible to reveal how the
building was constructed. 
Similar tensions between artistic elaboration and formal clarity are
apparent into the work of Wagners former assistant, Joseph Maria Olbrich.
In 1901 Olbrich designed the Ernst Ludwig Haus, which formed part of an
artists colony founded in Darmstadt by Ernest Ludwig, Grand Duke of Hesse.
 The white expanse of the faade anticipates the austerity of the Modern
Movement, but the entrance is a gilded shrine to the applied arts: heroic
figures of Strength and Beauty flank a sweeping archway adorned with golden
flowers and gleaming majolica tiles.
[pic]
Joseph Maria Olbrich, Ernst Ludwig Haus, Fertiggestellt, 1901
http://www.iticse2011.tu-
darmstadt.de/sites/default/files/ernstLudwigHaus.jpg
Some artists left the Vienna Secession due to internal disagreements.  In
1903 Hoffmann and Moser founded the Wiener Werksttte (Vienna Workshop).
This group was inspired by Charles Ashbees Guild of Handicraft, but
embraced the possibilities offered by mass production.  The pinnacle of
Hoffmanns achievement as an architect is the Palais Stoclet in Brussels
(1905-11).  With its ascending configuration of angular planes and use of
lustrous materials, the building pre-empts the ART DECO style by at least a
decade.
A later Secessionist group emerged in Berlin in 1899, with Max Lieberman as
its first president.  This was triggered by the Great International Art
Exhibition held in Berlin in 1892, which displayed Norwegian artists
including EDVARD MUNCH.  Members of the conservative Verein Berliner
Knstler (Association of Berlin Artists) protested against the exhibition
because they found Munch's paintings offensive.  Repudiating this view,
dissident artists including Watler Leistikow and Franz Skarbina seceded
from the Association of Berlin Artists in 1899 to found the Berlin
Secession.  In turn, several artists left the Berlin Secession to found the
Freie Secession (Free Secession), which lasted from 1914 to 1924.  Again,
Max Liebermann was president, while Max Beckmann and Ernest Barlach were
principal exponents.
References and further reading
Borsi, F. and Golodi, E. (1986) Vienna 1900: Architecture and Design. New
York: Rizzoli.  (This study examines the architecture produced in turn-of-
the-century Vienna and reveals how Wagner, Olbrich, Hoffman and Loos
contributed to the evolution of Modernism).
Bubnova, J. (1998) Vienna Secession, 1898-1998: the century of artistic
freedom. New York: Prestel.  (Translated from the German, this text
examines the exhibitions held at the Vienna Secession Hall between 1898 and
1998, and offers a short, readable discussion of the Secession itself).

Loos, A. (1998) Ornament and Crime: Selected Essays, Riverside, CA.:
Ariadne Press.  (This book features thirty-six essays by the Viennese
architect, Adolf Loos, including his seminal text Ornament and Crime).

Powell, N. (1974) The Sacred Spring: The Arts in Vienna, 1898-1918, London:
Studio Vista.   (This book studies a broad range of artistic activity in
Vienna, including the Secession and the Wiener Werkstatte.  The volume
includes a useful chapter on the Secessions journal, Ver Sacrum).

Topp, L. (2004) Architecture and Truth in Fin-de-Siecle Vienna. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.  (This book investigates the concept of truth
in turn-of-the-century Viennese architecture and explores the links between
architecture, painting, psychiatry and politics).
Varnedoe, K. (1986) Vienna 1900: Art, Architecture and Design. New York:
Museum of Modern Art.  (An accessible, well-organised account of the Vienna
Secession with separate chapters on architecture, design and art.  The
volume includes a useful chronology of Secessionist activity).
Vergo, P. (1975) Art in Vienna, 1898-1918: Klimt, Kokoschka, Schiele, and
their Contemporaries. London: Phaidon. (This text examines various strands
of fine art in Vienna in the first two decades of the twentieth century).

Waissenberger, R. (1971) Die wiener Secession. Munchen: Jugend und Volk.
(A German-language text, this volume presents a comprehensive study of the
Vienna Secession, with a particular emphasis on fine art).



