
Seferis, George (1900-1971)
Widely  recognised  as  the  main  representative  of  the  GREEK  MODERNISM
associated  with  the  Thirties  Generation,  George  Seferis  was   born
Georgios Seferiades ( ) in Urla, near Smyrna  (now  Izmir,
Turkey) in 1900 and died  on  20  September  1971  in  Athens,  Greece.  His
funeral became a symbolic act against  the  military  junta  (1967-74)  with
crowds following  his  coffin  through  Athens  singing  his  poem  Denial
() as set to music by Mikis Theodorakis. The song was banned by  the
regime at the time. The first Greek  to  receive  a  Nobel  Prize  in  1963,
Seferis travelled widely and had a successful diplomatic career working  for
the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It was on Christmas Eve  1931,  while
Seferis was posted in London, that he discovered T. S. ELIOTs Marina  and
The Waste Land  in  which  he  discerned  a  resurrection  of  the  dramatic
tradition. The literary friendships he forged from this period  onwards  led
to the translation into English of the collection  The  King  of  Asine  and
Other Poems by Nanos Valaoritis,  Lawrence  Durrell,  Bernard  Spencer,  and
George Katsimablis published in 1948 by  John  Lehmanns  publishing  house.
His personal and political journals  covering  the  period  from  the  1920s
until the 1960s are  important  documents  preserving  a  view  of  Greeces
historical and cultural development from  the  perspective  of  a  twentieth
century traveller.
      The destruction of Smyrna in  1922,  in  the  climax  of  a  war  that
brought about the compulsory exchange  of  populations  between  Greece  and
Turkey in 1923, left a long-lasting mark on the writing  of  his  generation
whose responsibility it was, as Seferis  noted  in  his  Nobel  Lecture,  to
create a new moral orientation after the exodus of one and a  half  million
people from Asia Minor and their reflux to the Greek mainland. The  clash
between European and Greek Hellenism, as Seferis termed the search  for  the
unique Greek elements that would in their turn ferment  modern  Europe  (a
quest voiced by George Theotokas in his 1929 essay Free Spirit), was  part
of an exploration by the writers of the Thirties of the identity  of  modern
Greece.
      Seferis started his career as a translator (his first  published  work
was a rendition of PAUL VALRYs Monsieur Teste in  1928)  with  the  poetry
collection Turning Point ()  appearing  in  1931,  The  Cistern  (
) in 1932, Mythistorema, a seminal Modernist text in 24  sections  of
free verse, following shortly after in 1935, and the first  edition  of  his
translation of T.S. ELIOTs The Waste Land (1922) in 1936. The struggle  for
a living language, Seferis noted, which the GREEK  MODERNISTS  inherited  as
the fraught Greek language  question  abated  in  the  1930s,  went  beyond
literature and was characterized by the will to challenge  every  aspect  of
the present. Significantly, when translating The Waste Land into  Greek  in
the early 1930s, Seferis found spiritual cross-breedings at  the  core  of
influences amongst nations, while he noted that the modern craft  of  speech
was initiated in British letters by two Irishmen and two Americans,  namely,
W.B. YEATS, JAMES JOYCE, EZRA POUND and T.S. ELIOT. The  openness  of  Greek
Letters to a world of influences from abroad was one  of  the  prerequisites
for the renewal Seferis worked to bring to literature of his time.
      Seferis maps a Greek landscape filled with ruins of the past (I  woke
with this marble head in my hands; / it exhausts my elbows and I dont  know
where to put it down, Mythistorema, trans. Keeley  and  Sherrard)  and  the
feeling that men of inconstancy, of wanderings and  of  wars  [...]  always
move  among  the  same  monsters  and  the  same  longings  (A  Letter  on
Thrush, 1949). Two additional examples of his style are to  be  found  in
his poems Erotikos Logos ( , 1930) and  Thrush  (,
1946). His language and mythical method draw from  the  Cretan  literature
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, folk tradition,  Homer  and  the
Greek tragedians. With a  rich  body  of  work,  including  poetry,  essays,
letters, translations, journals and an early novel, Seferis  was  trying  to
problematize, in BAUDELAIREs terms, the  presents  essential  quality  of
being the present by allowing legendary figures to move  anachronistically
onto the contemporary stage that the poet has set before our  eyes  (Edmund
Keeley and Philip Sherrard, Foreword to Collected Poems, 1995, xiv).

List of Key Works
Seferis,   George   (1995)Collected   Poems,   trans   and   ed.    Edmund
KeeleyandPhilip Sherrard, London:Anvil Press Poetry.
Seferis, George (1992)On the Greek Style: Selected  Essays  in  Poetry  and
Hellenism,   trans.Rex   WarnerandTh.D.   Frangopoulos,    Greece:Denise
Harvey.
Seferis, George  (1975)Days  of  1945-1951:  A  Poet's  Journal,  trans.A.
Anagnostopoulos, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Eliot, T.S. (1973)    (The Waste  Land,  1936),  5th  edn,  trans.
George Seferis, Athens: Ikaros.
Seferis, George (1969) Three Secret Poems, transWalter  Kaiser,  Cambridge,
Mass.:Harvard University Press.
Seferis,   George   (2007)A   Levant   Journal,   trans.Roderick   Beaton,
Jerusalem:Ibis Editions.
Seferis, George (2007)Six Nights on the  Acropolis:  A  Novel,  transSusan
Matthias, River Vale, N. J.:Cosmos Publishing.

References and Further Reading
Beaton, Roderick (2003) George Seferis: Waiting for the Angel, A  Biography,
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Keeley, Edmund (1970), George Seferis: The Art of Poetry No 13, The  Paris
Review, 50 (Fall),
http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/4112/the-art-of-poetry-no-13-
george-seferis
Seferis, George (1963), Nobel Prize Lecture,
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1963/seferis-
lecture.html
Theotokas, George (1986) Free Spirit (1929), tr. Soterios G. Stavrou,
Modern Greek Studies Yearbook 2, 153-200.
Tziovas, D. (ed.) (1997) Greek Modernism and Beyond: Essays in Honor of
Peter Bien, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc.

Konstantina Georganta


