
      [pic] Arthur Segal, Street in Helgoland II, 1924, oil on board with
      painted frame, 98,4 x 80cm, The Metropolitan Museum New York.




Segal, Arthur (1875-1944)


Arthur Segal was a Romanian artist born to Jewish parents  as  Aron  Sigalu.
He turned from a Post-impressionist modernism around 1900 to radical  avant-
garde stances in the early 1920s, and then back to a classicising  modernism
in  the  1940s.  His  work  moved  from  traditional  art-craft   (painting,
engraving)  to  modern  and  avant-garde  practices  (political  engagement,
teaching, curatorship, manifestos, theoretical writings, art-therapy).  From
1892 to 1900 he studied in Berlin, Paris, and Munich. Segal  was  a  student
of Adolf Hlzel (founder of the art  colony  Neues  Dachau);  his  work  was
shaped by Hlzels colour  theory  in  formally  structuring  landscapes  as
decorative grids rather than phenomenal transcripts  of  ocular  perception.
In 1902-03 he visited Italy and France and was influenced by  Van  Gogh  and
Segantini, whose naturalism and light-seeking divisionism  he  appropriated.
He exhibited with the Berliner Secession from 1909  onward,  and  co-founded
the Neue Secession in 1910. Segal remained connected  to  the  Romanian  art
scene, exhibiting with the Tinerimea Artistica group in  1910-13.  His  1910
Bucharest exhibition was heralded as the first exhibition  of  modern  art
in Romania. In 1914 Segal moved to Ascona, Switzerland, where  he  met  Hans
Arp,  Hugo  Ball,  and  Alexei  Jawlensky,  linked  with  the  Monte  Verita
community, and began to focus on natural harmony in art and  life.  In  1916
Segal exhibited at Cabaret  Voltaire,  alongside  fellow  Romanian  Dadaists
Tristan Tzara and Marcel  Janco.  In  1919  he  joined  the  Novembergruppe,
becoming one of its leaders.





In addition to Hlzels color theories and his own readings of  Goethe,  the
Monte Verita eco-sophic gnosis and Dadaist upheavals, Cubist,  Orphism,  and
Futurist influences contributed to Segals aesthetic-speculative  synthesis,
an optical equivalence (optische  Gleichwertigkeit),  which  he  developed
around 1917. Facing anarchy and the chaos of  WWI,  he  responded  with  his
theory of  hierarchy  and  dominance  in  art  and  society.  Segal  opposed
individualist subjective art, springing from a central point  of  power,
as  anti-collectivity  and  anti-social   symbol.   His   leftist   ideals
impregnated the  very  structure  of  his  works  although  the  iconography
remained traditional (landscapes, interiors).  In  his  work,  Segal  set  a
raster onto the canvases, distributing the colours as prismatic tonal  units
democratically in a glissando of contrasts, from  darkness  to  light,  as
derived from Schopenhauers equivalence theory.


After settling in Berlin in 1920, Segal founded his own painting school.  As
a member of groups such as Die Autonomen and Die Juryfreien,  Segal  favored
social engagement. He participated in Asso (or  ARBKD)  and  supported  with
Grosz, Kollwitz and Dix, the SPD and trade unions  actions  in  defense  of
Achtstundentag (eight hours work day). In 1925 his work  was  included  in
Die Kunstismen, and he declined a teaching position at the Bauhaus. His  his
work  of  the  late  1920s,  he  advocated  a  new  naturalism,   applying
divisionism in figurative  canvases.  Bordering  proto-photorealism  in  the
late 1930s,  he  saw  this  as  a  synthesis  of  Constructivism  and  Neue
Sachlichkeit. In 1933 Segal emigrated to Mallorca, and in 1936  he  settled
in  London,  where  he  opened  the  Arthur  Segal   Painting   School   for
Professionals  and  Non-Professionals.  Influenced  by   Freud   and   other
psychoanalysts and psychiatrists,  he  pioneered  art  as  psychotherapeutic
contribution in handling mental disorders.  He  died  on  23  June  1944  in
London.


References and further reading

Arthur Segal, Nikolaus Braun, Lichtprobleme der Bildenden  Kunst.  Konkretes
Licht, Berlin 1925.


Arthur Segal, The Objective Principles of Painting,  Arthur  Segal  Painting
School for Professionals and Non-professionals, London, 1976.

Wulf   Herzogenrath,   Pavel    Lika,    ArthurSegal18751944,exhibition
catalogue, Argon, Berlin, 1987.
Ernestine Segal, The  life  and  work  of  Arthur  Segal,  1875-1944.Arthur
Segals Painting School for  Professionals  and  Non-professionals,  London,
1956.




Tom Sandquist, Dada East: The Romanians  of  Cabaret  Voltaire,  MIT  Press,
Cambridge MA, 2006.



