
Author: Ndiouga Benga

Senghor, Lopold Sdar  (b. 1906 Joal, Senegal  d. 2001 Verson, France)

Poet, politician, and cultural  theorist,  Lopold  Sdar  Senghor  was  the
first president of Senegal from 1960 to 1980. His devotion to the arts as  a
critic, aesthete and patron developed during the  inter-war  period  in  the
formation of the concept of Ngritude  along  with  Aim  Csaire  and  Lon
Damas.  Senghor  designed   and   built   everything,   according   to   the
understanding of Ngritude as African authenticity independent from  Western
art conventions, as a claim of black identity and the cornerstones of  which
are rootedness and openness which inspire  his  aesthetic.  He  proposed  an
effort to prospective thinking, guided by  the  movement.  The  aim  was  to
transmit  to  young  generations  the  values  of  Ngritude,  through   the
introduction of modern technology. The Priority of Development  should  not
detract from the Primacy of Culture, as a contribution to  the  Civilization
of the Universal which is an integral humanism, a  horizon  and  a  purpose,
which nurtures and develops both body and soul he  wrote.  It  was  in  the
very essence of the  policy  of  Senegal  to  defend  the  values  of  black
civilization and to be the spearhead of young African  States  in  terms  of
education, culture and training. Therefore Senghor spent  more  than  thirty
percent of the national budget on these sectors in the 1960s.

Senghor  embarked  on  an  extensive  program  of  cultural  infrastructures
(School of  Arts,  Theatre  Sorano,  Muse  Dynamique,  Stade  de  lAmiti,
Cultural Archives, Centre for Civilizations Studies, Universit des  Mutants
de Gore, Lopold Sedar Senghor  Foundation...)  and  global  events  (World
Festival of Black  Arts,  Marc  Chagall,  Pablo  Picasso,  Pierre  Soulages,
Alfred Manessier, Iba Ndiaye, Andr Masson exhibitions in Dakar,  Senegalese
Arts Salon and cultural weeks abroad), which allowed the confrontation,  the
dissemination and the synthesis of Black Arts worldwide.  It  was  essential
to  place  Dakar  as  a  pole  of  cultural   Pan-Africanism   and   African
integration. The aesthetic of the  rhythm  and  the  asymmetric  parallelism
printed a specific direction to the cole de Dakar in  which  triumphed  the
theories and ideas of Senghor who oriented the bases of creation  by  direct
and regular interventions with artists. In the time of his omnipotence,  the
majority of the  creators in visual arts  were  inspired  by  or  took  into
account his  remarks,  resulting  in  the  marginalisation  of  artists  who
challenged the themes and practices of this art of "undeniable  Africanness"
such as the filmmaker Ousmane Sembne,  Laboratoire  Agit'  Art,  and  Front
Culturel.















Cheikh Makhone Diop, Lat Dior on Malaw, bronze carving, in Sylla, A.,  Seck,
S. and Mbaye,  M.  (eds.)  (unknown  date)  Une  passion  en  couleurs.  Art
contemporain du Sngal, collection de Abdoulaye Diop et de  Fatoumata  Sow,
Dakar: Imprimerie du Midi, p. 48.
















Mbor Faye, Portraiture of a Marabout, 1973, oil on  canvas,  in  Sylla,  A.,
Seck, S. and Mbaye, M. (eds.) (unknown date) Une passion  en  couleurs.  Art
contemporain du Sngal, collection de Abdoulaye Diop et de  Fatoumata  Sow,
Dakar: Imprimerie du Midi, p. 52.


Selected list of works

Senghor, L. S. (1964)  Libert I: Ngritude et Humanisme, Paris: Seuil.

Senghor,  L.  S.  (1977)  Libert  III:   Ngritude   et   Civilisation   de
lUniversel, Paris: Seuil

Senghor, L. S. (1993) Libert V: Le dialogue des cultures, Paris: Seuil

References and further reading

Bidima, J.-G. (1997) Lart ngro-africain, Paris: PUF.

Diagne,  S.  B.  (2007)  Lopold  Sedar  Senghor:  lart   africain   comme
philosophie, Paris: Riveneuve.

Spivak, G.  C.  (1990)  The  Postcolonial  Critic.  Interviews,  Strategies,
Dialogues, New York and London: Routledge

Sylla,  A. (2006) Lesthtique de Senghor. Essai, Dakar:  Les  Editions  Feu
de brousse.

Sylla, A., Seck, S. and Mbaye, M.  (eds.)  (unknown  date)  Une  passion  en
couleurs. Art contemporain du Sngal, collection de Abdoulaye  Diop  et  de
Fatoumata Sow, Dakar: Imprimerie du Midi

Vaillant, J. (1990) Black, French and African. A Life of Lopold Sedar
Senghor, London Cambridge: Harvard University Press.






