
Contributor: Heilna du Plooy

Entry: Sestigers, The



During the 1960s a group of Afrikaans writers who  called  themselves  Die
Sestigers (those of the sixties), became prominent on the  South  African
literary scene. Jan Rabies  collection  of  short  stories,  Een-en-Twintig
(Twenty One) (1956) and Etienne Lerouxs novel Die  Eerste  Lewe  van  Colet
(The First Life of Colet)  (1955) are regarded as the first clear  signs  of
the movement that literary  historians  describe  as  the  most  influential
literary movement in Afrikaans literature in the twentieth century.  Despite
huge differences in  style  and  content  these  writers,  including  poets,
novelists and dramatists, presented themselves  as  a  group  through  their
joint publications (the journals Sestiger and later  Kol,  as  well  as  the
collection of short stories Windroos), and by publicly debating their  ideas
about  literature.  They  broke  with  tradition  by  explicitly   rejecting
existing literary styles and themes. They shared a world  view  that  veered
away from traditional Afrikaans cultural and religious views and  which  was
influenced by philosophers like Nietzsche and  Sartre,  authors  like  Camus
and Kafka, and art movements like surrealism and expressionism.

Andr P. Brink (1967:13) describes three prominent  characteristics  of  the
Sestigers: an acceptance of  the  relative  nature  of  reality,  ideas  and
literature itself; experimentation and even exploitation  of  the  structure
of the novel, resulting in a changed concept of the epic  world;  and  the
use and exploration of time and temporal relations as an active part of  the
structure of the novel.

The most prominent figures in the movement are  novelists  such  as  Etienne
Leroux, Andr P. Brink, Abraham H. de Vries, Jan  Rabie,  Dolf  van  Niekerk
and Chris Barnard, the poets Breyten Breytenbach,  Ingrid  Jonker  and  Adam
Small, the last of whom was, like  Bartho  Smit,  also  a  dramatist.  Other
writers such as Henriette Grov, Anna M. Louw, Elsa Joubert, Karel  Schoeman
and Berta Spies published in the same period but remain on the periphery  of
the movement of the Sestigers as such.

The Sestigers are regarded as the  Modernists  of  Afrikaans  literature  on
account of their views of literature and  their  literary  practices.  These
include: the view that literature is not a realistic or  mimetic  reflection
of life, but a representation of a perception of reality  of  an  individual
rather than a group; the belief that truth is unattainable and therefore  an
author can only present a preliminary and personal account  of  whatever  he
wants to write about; the  acceptance  that  all  knowledge  is  subject  to
epistemological uncertainty and  doubt;  a  metalinguistic  scepticism  that
calls  into  question  the  efficacy  of  language  as  a   tool   for   the
representation of meaning and that opens up the possibilities for free  play
and the exploitation and exploration of language in  the  literary  process;
and the acknowledgement and consciousness of the role of the reader  as  co-
producer of meaning.

Consequently the  tone  of  the  texts  is  often  tinted  with  scepticism,
cynicism, angst, a sense of  being  lost,  a  sense  of  meaninglessness,  a
debunking   attitude,   disillusionment,   loneliness,   an   awareness   of
relativism,  and  a  constant  questioning   of   values   and   principles.
Structurally and  stylistically  the  Sestigers  experiment  with  narrative
structure and  narrational  devices  and  often  make  use  of  symbols  and
extended metaphors that activate a wide range  of  intertextual  references.
These texts thus opened up the  Afrikaans  literary  mind  to  international
ideas and concepts. Fantasy and irony were often used, and  many  texts  can
be described as surrealist. There are also numerous examples of  experiments
with typography and style,  but  the  most  prominent  feature  remains  the
experimentation  with  complex  narrative  techniques,  including   temporal
relations, focalisation, narration and metatextuality, so that  these  texts
are sophisticated and self-conscious in content and style.

Popular themes that are developed are the  individual  against  the  system,
existential angst,  mans  cruelty,  the  abject  outsider,  eroticism,  the
exploration of sexuality, and man as a traveller without a destination.

Existentialism was initially a strong impulse in the work of  the  Sestigers
and in this regard Afrikaans literature came close to English  and  European
literature of the first half of the twentieth  century  by  gaining  a  more
cosmopolitan  and  universal  character.  From  the  early  1970s   onwards,
however, the focus shifted away from the individuals  existential  position
to the political problems that dominated collective life in South Africa.

The  Sestigers  was  an  immensely   influential   movement   in   Afrikaans
literature. Its practitioners all remained productive writers for  at  least
three to four decades and developed their initial positions  and  principles
to include a variety of styles,  techniques  and  thematic  material.  Their
texts were also influential in opening up political views in  the  Afrikaans
community. The Sestigers paved the way for generations of writers to come.



References and further readings

Cloete,  T.T.  (ed.)  (1980)  Die  Afrikaanse   Literatuur   Sedert   Sestig
(Afrikaans Literature of the Sixties), Goodwood: Nassau.

Kannemeyer, J.C. (1984) Geskiedenis van die Afrikaanse  Literatuur  (History
of Afrikaans Literature), Kaapstad: Academica.

Van  Coller,  H.P.  (ed.)  (1998)  Perspektief  en  Profiel:  n  Afrikaanse
Literatuurgeskiedenis.  Deel  1  (Perspective  and  Profile:  An   Afrikaans
Literary History), Pretoria: JL Van Schaik.





