
Max Bbeckmann

Born: 1884LEIPZIG; Died: 1950NEW YORK

A painter, printmaker, sculptor, and writer, Max Beckmann achieved success
at an early age. After studying art in Weimar and spending some months in
Paris, Beckmann moved to Berlin in late 1904. Participating in an art
competition there, he was awarded an opportunity to study in Florence. His
prize-winning painting, Young Men by the Sea, was bought by the Weimar
Museum in 1905, an unprecedented occurrence for a twenty-year-old painter.

Beckmann was admitted to the Berlin Secession in 1906 and took part in
their annual exhibitions to favourable response. He worked in an academic
style, painting melodramatic renditions of disasters such as the Messina
earthquake in 1910, and the sinking of the Titanic in 1912, or mythological
or biblical scenes.

Until 1913, Beckmanns work was not considered avant-garde. A controversy
between him and Franz Marc in 1912 regarding the merits of contemporary art
played out in the periodical Pan, placing Beckmann on the side of the
conservative artistic establishment.

Beckmann never wanted to be classified with the Expressionistsor to be a
part of any group or trend. Yet his later work, in which he developed his
personal, subjective, symbolic world, must be considered with the
Eexpressionist movement.

Beckmann enlisted in the medical corps duringin World War I. His war
experiences wrought an enormous change in his imagery, ridding it of all
sentimentality, melodrama and conventional perspective, which is replaced
by shallow space; his work became simpler, more concentrated and
restrained.

In 1915, Max Beckmann suffered a nervous breakdown as a result of his
military service and was sent to a convalescent hospital in Frankfurt am
Main. He developed an interest in the art of the Middle Ages, particularly
Grnewalds Isenheim  Altarpiece and the work of Hieronymus Bosch.

He remained in Frankfurt for twenty years. In the post-war period, his
style evolved to a verism that is forthright, harsh, and disillusioned.

In the subsequent thirty years, Beckmann created his own mythspersonal,
complicated, and enigmatic. His convictions regarding the existential
tragedy of human life affected his symbols and his use of space, and caused
his imagery to increase in complexity and elaboration.

Beckmann reached the height of popularity during the years 1924-1930. A
monograph (the second in his brief career to date) by the leading critics
Glaser, Meier-Graefe, Fraenger, and Hausenstein was published in 1924; the
dealer I.B. Neumann signed Beckmann to a three-year contract in July 1925,
and later that year he became a master teacher at the Stdelschule in
Frankfurt. In 1928, the first museum retrospective of his work was
organized in Mannheim, and the Nationalgalerie in Berlin purchased his Self-
Portrait in Tuxedo. Beckmann received fourth honourable mention at the
Carnegie International in the US in 1929. Another retrospective followed in
Basel and Zurich, and his first solo exhibition in Paris opened at the
Galerie de la Renaissance. The critic for Le Figaro called him a German
Picasso.

But in March 1933, under the National Socialist regime, Max Beckmann was
dismissed from his teaching post at the Stdelschule. Also in 1933, a
gallery devoted to his paintings at the Kronprinzenpalais in Berlin was
closed. Paintings and prints from throughout his career were included in
the Degenerate Art Exhibition organized by the Nazis in 1937, which
signaled the end of his career in Germany.

Beckmann and his wife fled to Amsterdam, and after the difficult war years
in Holland were able to immigratedemigrate to the United StatesSA in 1947.
There Beckmann taught at Washington University in St. Louis. In 1949, he
became professor of painting and drawing at the Brooklyn Museum School of
Art in New York, where he remained until his death on December 27, 1950.



References:

Barron, Stephanie, ed., Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-Garde in Nazi
Germany, (exh. cat.) Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1991.

Selz, Peter. German Expressionist Painting. Berkeley, Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1974.



