
Beier, Ulli (1922-2011)

Ulli Beier (b. 1922, Glowitz, Poland - d. 2011,  Sydney,  Australia)  was  a
Polish-born,  publisher,  writer,  translator,  lecturer,  curator,  theatre
producer and particularly a promoter and collector of arts.  Throughout  his
career, Beiers interests  shifted  between  Aboriginal  Art  in  Australia,
outsider art in India and Papua New Guinea, but  the  focus  of  his  lifes
work was centred in Nigeria, where he would come to shape the  arts  as  one
of the first outsiders to recognize and  support  the  emerging  modern  art
movement in this  country.  By  promoting  and  collecting  traditional  and
modern art he shaped a very specific image of  Africa.  Beiers  initiatives
such as the Black Orpheus magazine,  the  Mbari-Club  in  Ibadan  and  the
Mbari-Mbayo-Club in Osogbo helped new forms of  African  art  to  develop  a
voice and aesthetic. From 1981-1996, Beier was the director  of  the  Center
of African Culture at the University in Bayreuth,  the  Iwalewa-Haus,  where
he continued to promote  art  from  all  over  the  world,  in  exhibitions,
festivals and publications, until he retired with his  wife  Georgina  Beier
to Sydney, Australia where he died in 2011.

Ulli Beier was born 1922 in Glowitz (Pomerania), nowadays  Poland,  the  son
of a Jewish  physician.  He  grew  up  in  Berlin,  but  when  the  National
Socialist Party seized power in Germany, the family moved  to  Palestine  in
1933. At that time, Ulli Beier completed a distance course in special  needs
education carried out in London, where he  later  finished  his  studies  in
phonetics. In 1949 he met the Austrian artist Susanne Wenger (1915-2009)  in
Paris and married her in the same year.
In October 1950, Beier went with Wenger to Nigeria where he  taught  English
phonetics at the University  of  Ibadan.  Once  settled  in  Nigeria,  Beier
claims his life properly began. In the same year,  Beier  visited  a  mental
institution in Abeokuta and provided the  patients  with  paint  and  paper.
Being aware of the Art Brut Movement in Paris, which was  a  label  for  art
outside of the official cultural boundaries, he began to collect  the  works
produced by his pupils.
Beier and Wenger became learned and practiced in  the  Yoruba  language  and
culture, and able to mediate culturally between  Africa  and  Europe.  Beier
wrote  down  orally  transmitted  Yoruba  plays  and  stories  in   English,
translated European plays into Yoruba and emerged as  one  of  the  scholars
who introduced  African  writers  to  a  large  international  audience.  He
documented the religious life of the Yoruba, collected their cultural  works
and gained the chief title  of  Bobagunwa  as  the  spokesperson  for  young
actors, musicians and artists. Beier considered himself the preserver  of  a
culture that was in danger of disappearing, but he was also aware of  a  new
emerging African art, which he would address in  his  publication  of  1968,
Contemporary  Art  in  Africa.  Here  he  presented   one   of   the   first
acknowledgments of individual artists, which helped redirect  a  traditional
ethnographic view of African Arts towards a modern concept.
In 1957, he founded the literary  magazine  Black  Orpheus:  A  Journal  of
African and Afro-American Literature  together  with  Janheinz  Jahn,  Wole
Soyinka and  Chinua  Achebe,  providing  a  platform  to  propagate  African
literature. In 1961, he co-founded the Mbari-Club in Ibadan, which  was  a
meeting place for intellectuals and artists of any kind. In 1962 the Mbari-
Mbayo-Club, housed in the childhood  home  of  the  Yoruba  dramatist  Duro
Ladipo, was opened in Osogbo.
In 1963, the painter and sculptor Georgina Betts (b. 1938) came  to  Nigeria
and shortly afterwards  she  became  Ulli  Beiers  second  wife.  By  1964,
Georgina was conducting the annual art  workshop  at  the  Mbari-Mbayo-Club,
the starting point for the formation of the Osogbo Art School.
In  1967  the  Beiers  moved  to  Papua-New  Guinea.  As  professor  at  the
University of  Papua  New  Guinea  in  Port  Moresby,  Ulli  Beier  fostered
writers, whereas Georgina encouraged New Guineans  to  take  up  the  visual
arts. During their stay in Papua New Guinea pieces  of  their  Nigerian  art
collection were shown in Europe and the United States.
During the seventies, the couple  relocated  frequently  between  Papua  New
Guinea, Nigeria, and Sydney, Australia, ultimately ending up in Germany.  An
exhibition of African Art produced by Ulli Beier at the University in  Mainz
in 1997 was so successful that Klaus-Dieter Wolff,  the  founding  president
of the University of Bayreuth,  offered Beier the directorate  of  a  centre
for modern African Art at the University. Ulli Beier accepted  the  position
when it was agreed that the centre would function not only as  a  museum  of
contemporary art and culture from Africa  and  other  non-Western  countries
but also as an art gallery and  artist  residency  program  (Obafemi,  1993:
30).

In 1981 Beier was officially elected  the  director  of  this  centre  named
Iwalewa-Haus after the Yoruba phrase character is beauty.  Beiers  invited
artists and friends from all over  the  world  to  come  and  exhibit  their
works; here they lived together with their collection  of  modern  art  from
Nigeria,  Papua  New  Guinea  and  Australia.  With  that  he  expanded  the
collection and made the institute  into  a  nationally  and  internationally
recognized address. Beier held the director position until 1996.
In 1997 the Beiers left Germany for good and moved to Sydney, where they
became interested in Aboriginal art. Ulli Beier died in Sydney in 2011.

[pic]
Ulli Beier, c. 1965
Copyrights: DEVA und Iwalewa-Haus, Universitt Bayreuth; Center for Black
Culture and International Understanding (CBCIU), Osogbo, Nigeria
*No URL for this image, author procured it direct from Iwalewa Haus:
contact Iwalewa directly for copyright
Iwalewa-Haus

[pic]
Copyrights: DEVA und Iwalewa-Haus, Universitt Bayreuth; Center for Black
Culture and International Understanding (CBCIU), Osogbo, Nigeria

http://www.iwalewa.uni-bayreuth.de/de/index.html

References and further reading

Beier, Ulli (1968), Contemporary Art in Africa, New York  Washington 
London: Frederick A.
      Praeger
      - (1982), Glcklose Kpfe: Malerei von Ver-rckten aus Nigeria,
Bremen: CON
      - (1994), The Return of Shango, The Theatre of Duro Ladipo, Bayreuth:
Iwalewa-Haus 
      University of Bayreuth
Deliss, Clmentine (ed.) (1995), Seven Stories About Modern Art in Africa,
London:  Whitechapel
Enwezor, Okwui (et al.) (2001), The Short Century: Independence and
Liberation Movements in Africa 1945-1994,
      Munich - London - New York: Prestel
Kasfir, Sidney Littlefield (1999), Contemporary African Art, London: Thames
6 Hudson Ltd.
Larson, Charles R. (1972), Ulli Beier: African Playwright ?' Books Abroad.
Vol. 46, No 3, pp. 393  396,
      Norman: Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma
Ogundele, Wole (2003), Omoluabi: Ulli Beier, Yoruba Society and Culture,
Bayreuth: Bayreuth University
Ogundele, Wole (ed.) (2001), Character is Beauty: Redefining Culture and
Identity (Iwalewa-Haus, 1981-1996),
      Trenton  Asmara: Africa World Press
Pivin, Jean Loup (ed.) (2002), An Anthology of African Art: The Twentieth
Century, New York: Distributed
      Art Publishers
Probst, Peter (2011), Osogbo and the Art of Heritage, Monuments, Deities,
and Money, Bloomington: Indiana
      University Press







