Sholay (1975)



Sholay  (Director: Ramesh Sippy: Screenplay: Javed Akhtar and Saleem Khan) - is considered to be the most successful film in Indian film history. It is influenced by American Western films such as Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969), the Spaghetti Western Once Upon a Time in the West (1968), and also Kurosawa’s The Seven Samuria (1954). To match the magnitude of the American Westerns, Sholay was to be India’s first 70 mm film with stereophonic sound, but due to the expenses involved, it was shot on 35 mm and then converted to 70 mm widescreen format. 



Sholay indigenized the genre of Westerns by merging it with the conventions of Hindi film melodramas, such as the use of songs, romantic love, Hindu rituals and caste system, representation of Hindu and Muslim characters, along with a unique portrayal of diverse dialects of North-Indian languages, especially Hindi. The narrative features Thakur Baldev Singh (Sanjeev Kumar), an ex-cop, who hires two convicts Jai (Amitabh Bachchan) and Veeru (Dharmendra) to avenge the dacoit Gabbar Singh (Amjad Khan), who had murdered Thakur’s family. A love interest develops between Thakur’s widowed daughter-in-law Radha (Jaya Bhaduri) and Jai, while Veeru falls in love with Basanti (Hema Malini), a comic and chatty horse-cart rider. 



M.S Shinde was awarded the Filmfare award for Best-Editing in 1976, but in 2005 the film was proclaimed by Filmfare as the best film over the last 50 years. 



References and further reading:

 

Chopra, Anupam. (2000) Sholay: The Making of a Classic, New Delhi, Penguin. 



Dissanayake Wimal  and Malti Sahai. (1992) Sholay: A Cultural Reading, New Delhi, Wiley Eastern.



Paratextual Material:



For Reviews and Sholay 3D adaptation (2014): http://www.indiancinemagallery.com/



40 Fact About Sholay You Probably Didn’t Know: http://indiaopines.com/40-years-sholay-40-facts-sholay-didnt/



Bollywood Movie Posters: http://www.bollywoodmovieposters.com/products-page/old-indian-movie-posters-for-sale/sholay-4/





Contributor: Rahul Sapra, Ryerson University