Shu Ting 舒婷  (1952-  )



Shu Ting (pen name for Gong Peiyu 龚佩瑜) was born in Xiamen, Fujian Province, People’s Republic of China in 1952. Her formal schooling ended in 1969 when her family was sent down to the countryside during the CULTURAL REVOLUTION. After returning to her hometown in 1972, she took on a succession of different industrial jobs in factories around Fujian Province and began writing and publishing in small journals. 

During the period of Opening and Reform in the late 1970s, Shu Ting began collaborating with poets who became collectively known as the  蒙胧诗派 (pinyin: Menglongshipai), which means “Hazy” or “obscure poetry school” and is frequently translated as the “MISTY POETS,” and included the writers BEI DAO北岛, Mang Ke芒克, and GU CHENG 顾城. Through her contributions to the main organ associated with the Misty Poets, 今天 (pinyin: Jintian), translated as “Today,” she became recognized as one of the most prominent woman poets of not only the Misty Poets, but of her generation. Twice winner of Chinese national poetry awards, including the 中青年优秀诗歌作品奖 (pinyin: Zhongqingnian youxiu shige zuopinjiang) China's Award for Excellence in Poetry by a Young Writer in 1980 for her poem “祖国啊，我亲爱的祖国 [“Motherland Ah, My Darling Motherland”],” Shu Ting received critical attention for her writing very early in her career for poems that explored the emotional and interior world of the poet even while attending official requirements of the state. Shu Ting published her first collection in 1982, 双桅船 (pinyin: Shuangwei chuan), Two-Masted Ship (1982). The same year she collaborated with fellow Misty poet, Gu Cheng, publishing 舒婷，顾城抒情诗选 (pinyin: Shu Ting, Gu Cheng Shuqingshixuan), A Collection of Shu Ting and Gu Cheng’s Lyrical Poems (1982). 

While enjoying wide praise and a large audience, by 1983 Shu Ting had joined other Misty Poets as a target of the Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign. Like other Misty Poets, Shu Ting's poems were criticized as “modernist,” which was a veiled condemnation that the poems were mere imitations of European and American writers. Moreover, the feeling amongst critics was that the difficulty of their poetry and irreducible complexity of their figurations represented a form of anti-social subversion, especially because they refused to follow the conventions of revolutionary romanticism and social realism as proscribed by Mao Zedong's 1942 Yan'an address. For example, in poems like “也许,” (pinyin: Ye Xu) “Maybe,” Shu Ting offers a humanistic vision of sacrifice and meaning, relying on elusive and extended metaphors. While not considered as radical an experimentalist as other members of the Misty Poets, Shu Ting’s poetry shares their use of unique symbolism to represent interior landscapes, emotions, and romantic love. 

Unlike other Misty Poets, such as Bei Dao and Gu Cheng, Shu Ting never emigrated from China. She joined the Fujian Province Writers Association where she has continued to write poetry and essays and promote literary culture in China. Her work has been translated into several languages and published in many international poetry collections.  





In-Text Links



MISTY:

http://www.poets.org/viewmedia.php/prmMID/5663



CULTURAL REVOLUTION

http://chineseposters.net/themes/cultural-revolution-campaigns.php



BEI DAO

http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/bei-dao



TODAY

http://www.jintian.net/today/



GU CHENG

http://www.gucheng.net





Poetry Collections in English

		The Mist of My Heart: Selected Poems of Shu Ting, translated by Gordon T. Osing (1995)

		

		Shu Ting: Selected Poems, edited by Eva Hung (1994)

		



Anthology Inclusions

		A Book of Luminous Things: An International Anthology of Poetry, edited by Czeslaw Milosz (1998)

		

		Red Azalea: Chinese Poetry Since the Cultural Revolution, edited by Fang Dai and Edward Morin (1990)

		

		Major Works in Chinese

福建文艺 (pinyin: Fujian Wenyi) Literary Arts of Fujian Province (1980)

双桅船 (pinyin: Shuangwei chuan), Two-Masted Ship (1982)

舒婷，顾城抒情诗选 (pinyin: Shu Ting, Gu Cheng Shuqingshixuan) A Collection of 

	Shu Ting and Gu Cheng’s Lyrical Poems (1982)

会唱歌的鸢尾花 (pinyin: Hui Changge de Yuanhui Hua) Singing Iris (1986)

流水线(pinyin: Liu Shui Xian) Assembly Line (2009)

神女峰 (pinyin: Shen Nu Feng) Goddess (2009)

很是惭愧，父亲 (pinyin: Hen Shi Cankui, Fuqin) I’m Very Ashamed, Father (2009)

惠安女子 (pinyin: Hui’an Nuzi) The Hui’an Woman (2009)