
The Spanish Civil War (1936-1939)
The Spanish Civil War was a major military conflict between right-wing
Nationalists and left-wing Republicans, which erupted after a coup dtat
staged by rebel generals against the democratically elected Republican
government. Following the defense of Madrid during which Republicans held
off a Nationalist siege on the Spanish capital, the conflict settled into a
war of attrition, with Spain divided into two radically opposed
territories. On the Nationalist side, an authoritarian dictatorship
bolstered by the fascistic Carlist and Falange militias under General
Frederico Franco (1892-1975) emerged, representing the interests of Spains
conservative and Catholic elites. Defenders of the Republican government
under President Manuel Azaa (1880-1940) organized around radical Anarchist
and Socialist trade-unions (CNT, UGT, POUM) and volunteer militias.
      As a struggle between opposing ambitions for Spanish modernity, the
conflict became a battlefield for the ideological, cultural and political
movements within Spain and throughout the world. The international impact
of the Spanish Civil War was significant; numerous nation-states, cultural
figures and foreign volunteers entered the conflict, which effectively
acted as the rehearsal for World War II. Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy
provided arms to the eventually victorious Nationalists, while the Soviet
Union aided the Republicans. France, Great Britain, the United States and
Canada chose to uphold a policy of Non-Intervention. Up to 60 000
volunteers from abroad made up of artists, writers, veterans and workers
entered Spain to fight with the Republicans as the International
Brigades.
      The war was a formative moment for the modern European narrative,
shaping the future of war, culture, society and politics. The use of visual
propaganda (pioneered especially by Republican artists in political
posters), the role of reportage and mass media to voice moral outcry, the
rise of the personality cult and the primacy of ideology all contributed to
the development of the twentieth centurys modernized warfare. Spain
witnessed the first aerial bombardment of civilian targets, the
introduction of psychological warfare, Blitzkrieg and the mobilization of
ideologically motivated military squads against domestic civilian enemies.
On the Republican side, war was accompanied by a process of social
revolution in which agrarian land reform, the transfer of production to the
hands of workers and the abolition of military rank in certain areas
occurred behind the front. Women took leading roles in many areas of
revolution, reform and activism. The Catholic Church supported the
Nationalists, whose cleansing operations in occupied territory were
articulated as a modern-day crusade against the heathen Republicans.
      The conflict reverberated through modernist literature and artistic
production, providing the setting for many influential cultural works.
George Orwells Homage to Catalonia (1938), Ernest Hemingways For Whom the
Bell Tolls (1940), Andr Malrauxs Days of Hope (1968) and Stephen
Spenders Poems from Spain (1939), among others, reflected on first-hand
experiences by the authors fighting for the Republicans. Pro-Republican
propaganda films were screened internationally, such as Hemingway and Joris
Ivenss The Spanish Earth (1937) and Andr Malrauxs Sierra de Teruel
(L'Espoir) (1939). Artists such as Henry Moore, Joan Mir and Pablo
Picasso, whose 1937 Cubist-work Guernica would later become iconographic of
the conflict, rallied around the Republican cause. Although most writers in
the politically engaged and left-leaning 1930s literary scene supported the
Republicans, T. S. Eliot was a public proponent of neutrality, whereas
Evelyn Waugh, Hillaire Belloc, Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein and Wyndham Lewis
supported the Nationalists.
David Jones, Ryerson University

References and further reading
Cunningham, V. (ed.) (1980) The Penguin Book of Spanish Civil War Verse,
London: Penguin.
------ (1986) Spanish Front: Writers on the Civil War, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Graham, H. and Labanyi, J. (eds.) (1995) Spanish Cultural Studies: An
Introduction, The Struggle for Modernity, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Esenwein, G. and Shubert, A. (1995) Spain at War: The Spanish Civil War in
Context 1931-1939, London: Longman.
Preston, P. (ed). (1984) Revolution and War in Spain, 1931-1939, London:
Routledge.
------ (2006) The Spanish Civil War. London: Harper Collins.
Vernon, K. (ed.), (1990) The Spanish Civil War and the Visual Arts. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.

Paratextual Material
Ernest Hemingway and John Dos Passos, The Spanish Earth (Reels 1-6),
National Archives and Records Administration - ARC 5717241, LI 226-G-6398:
http://archive.org/details/gov.archives.arc.5717241.1
Posters of the Spanish Civil War from UCSDs Southworth Collection:
http://libraries.ucsd.edu/speccoll/visfront/intro.html
Terrified Civilians Flee Air Raid, 1936/09/09 (1936) newsreel video:
http://archive.org/details/1936-09-09_Terrified_Civilians_Flee_Air_Raid
Spanish Civil War Photo Essay:
http://www.english.illinois.edu/maps/scw/photessay.htm
