

Ernst Stadler was a German expressionist poet, best known for his 1914 collection Der Aufbruch, selections of which were included by Kurt Pinthus in his ground-breaking anthology Menschheitsdämmerung (The Dawn of Humanity, 1919).



Born in the Alsatian town of Colmar, Stadler grew up in Strasbourg and began publishing poems as a teenager. He joined the ‘Stürmer-Kreis’, a coterie of writers hoping to rejuvenate artistic life in Alsatia, and in 1904 published an early collection of poems, Praeludien, which was strongly influenced by aestheticism. Stadler taught German and comparative literature in Strasbourg and Brussels before being summoned to his post as a reserve officer in the German army at the outbreak of the First World War.

Ernst Stadler was a German expressionist poet, best known for his 1914 collection Der Aufbruch, selections of which were included by Kurt Pinthus in his ground-breaking anthology Menschheitsdämmerung (The Dawn of Humanity, 1919).



Born in the Alsatian town of Colmar, Stadler grew up in Strasbourg and began publishing poems as a teenager. He joined the ‘Stürmer-Kreis’, a coterie of writers hoping to rejuvenate artistic life in Alsatia, and in 1904 published an early collection of poems, Praeludien, which was strongly influenced by aestheticism. Stadler taught German and comparative literature in Strasbourg and Brussels before being summoned to his post as a reserve officer in the German army at the outbreak of the First World War. He was killed in Flanders.



Stadler’s best-known poem, the sonnet ‘Fahrt über die Kölner Rheinbrücke bei Nacht’ [‘Ride Across the Rhine Bridge at Cologne by Night’] showcases the expressionists’ characteristic preoccupation both with life and with its annihilation, and is written in ‘long verse’ form, featuring iambic lines of greatly varying length that lend Stadler’s writing a breathless quality and epic scope.



Stadler was also an accomplished translator from the French.



File: Stadler.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-URz1upmiP84/UIMYt1MT5pI/AAAAAAAAQ2s/GkmELyowu1s/s400/leo.jpg







Key Works

Praeludien (1904)

Der Aufbruch (1914)

Francis Jammes: Die Gebete der Demut (Translation from the French, 1913)

Further reading:

[Enter citations for further reading here]