

Stam, Mart (1899–1986)

Stam, Martinus Adrianus

Mart (Martinus Adrianus) Stam (1899 in Purmerend, Netherlands – 1986 in Goldach, Switzerland) was a Dutch architect, designer, and architectural theorist and was involved in a number of principal events and organisations during the 1920s and 1930s.



Stam moved to Berlin in 1922 to work as a draughtsman with Max Taut and Hans Poelzig among others. While in Berlin, Stam met El Lissitzky who introduced him to constructivism. Inspired by the progressive and social outlook of this Russian movement Stam founded the avant-garde magazine ABC. Beiträge zum Neuen Bauen [ABC. Contributions on Building] together with Hans Schmidt and Emil Roth (1924-1928). The magazine focussed on convincing readers about the social necessity for low-cost, well-designed, and functional houses as well as the use of modern technologies. ABC furthermore established connections to Asnova the association of new architects in Moscow, and published student work of Vkhutemas [School of Modern Architecture] in Moscow. 

Mart (Martinus Adrianus) Stam (1899 in Purmerend, Netherlands – 1986 in Goldach, Switzerland) was a Dutch architect, designer, and architectural theorist and was involved in a number of principal events and organisations during the 1920s and 1930s.



Stam moved to Berlin in 1922 to work as a draughtsman with Max Taut and Hans Poelzig among others. While in Berlin, Stam met El Lissitzky who introduced him to constructivism. Inspired by the progressive and social outlook of this Russian movement Stam founded the avant-garde magazine ABC. Beiträge zum Neuen Bauen [ABC. Contributions on Building] together with Hans Schmidt and Emil Roth (1924-1928). The magazine focussed on convincing readers about the social necessity for low-cost, well-designed, and functional houses as well as the use of modern technologies. ABC furthermore established connections to Asnova the association of new architects in Moscow, and published student work of Vkhutemas [School of Modern Architecture] in Moscow. 



In 1927 Stam contributed to the exhibition Die Wohnung [The Dwelling] in Stuttgart with the design of a row house. The exhibition was organized by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and the Deutsche Werkbund to showcase developments of functionalist and ‘objective’ architecture and was influential in the dissemination of ideas about modern design and architecture. In his design, Stam was interested in the development of mass-housing types for working-class dwellers.

For his house in Stuttgart, Stam also designed a cantilevered tubular steel chair – his best-known design. The novelty of the chair was in the idea of a seat without back legs for support. As a proponent of functionalism Stam sought to overcome predetermined designs and shapes and rejected notions of beauty through symmetry, or the use of ornament for symbolic and representational ends. Designers like Stam developed objects by analysing their use and by incorporating mass-producible materials to arrive at a prototype for mass-production, instead of at a handcrafted and unique item.



In 1928 Stam was among the founding members of the CIAM (Congrès internationaux d'architecture moderne) that provided an international platform for the various members and theoretical outlooks of the early 20th-century modern movement. 



File:Hellerhof.jpg

Figure 1 Hellerhof settlement -- Frankfurt, 1929

Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Neues-frankfurt_hellerhofsiedlung_mart-stam_%284%29.jpg/1920px-Neues-frankfurt_hellerhofsiedlung_mart-stam_%284%29.jpg



In 1928/29, Stam taught as a guest lecturer for urban planning at the Bauhaus in Dessau and also began working at Frankfurt am Main. Here, the German architect Ernst May pursued under the title Das Neue Frankfurt [The New Frankfurt] a citywide housing programme for working-class dwellers in an effort to establish better living conditions through standardised housing types. Stam was involved in the settlement Hellerhof (1929) and the Henry and Emma Budge Foundation Old People’s Home (1929-1930). He furthermore joined May when he was invited to the USSR to work on city planning and standard designs for housing and communal living. (1930).

Stam’s most acclaimed work during the 1930s is the Drive-in Flats (1936) in Amsterdam. For five years after World War II Stam taught at several institutions in the German Democratic Republic (1948-1953) but he did not regain his pre-war influence in later years.

Further reading:

(Ingberman)



(Máčel)



(Möller)



(Rümmele)



(Stam and Blijstra)