

John Addington Symonds was an English historian, biographer, and poet best known for his writings on sexuality. Though Symonds’s father was a well-known physician and author, Symonds did not distinguish himself academically early on. However, he met with success as a poet and a scholar while at Oxford. Though he had relationships with men as a student, he married Janet Catherine North in 1864; the couple had four children. Despite lifelong poor health, Symonds was prolific, publishing biographies of Michelangelo, Ben Jonson, Percy Shelly, and Walt Whitman, his seven-volume historical masterwork The Renaissance, and several volumes of poetry and memoirs. Symonds suffused his writing with references to homosexual love: for example, his translations of Michelangelo’s love sonnets correct previous translators’ excisions of male pronouns. In his 1873 work A Problem in Greek Ethics, Symonds pays tribute to Greek love between men, though dividing such relationships into ‘chivalrous’ and ‘lustful’ categories and categorizing the latter as ‘vice’. His 1891 A Problem of Modern Ethics argues explicitly for the understanding and decriminalization of homosexuality. Symonds’s influence can be seen in the work of Oscar Wilde, E. M. Forster, and Havelock Ellis, with whom he co-authored the sexological study Sexual Inversion before his death in 1893.



John Addington Symonds was an English historian, biographer, and poet best known for his writings on sexuality. Though Symonds’s father was a well-known physician and author, Symonds did not distinguish himself academically early on. However, he met with success as a poet and a scholar while at Oxford. Though he had relationships with men as a student, he married Janet Catherine North in 1864; the couple had four children. Despite lifelong poor health, Symonds was prolific, publishing biographies of Michelangelo, Ben Jonson, Percy Shelly, and Walt Whitman, his seven-volume historical masterwork The Renaissance, and several volumes of poetry and memoirs. Symonds suffused his writing with references to homosexual love: for example, his translations of Michelangelo’s love sonnets correct previous translators’ excisions of male pronouns. In his 1873 work A Problem in Greek Ethics, Symonds pays tribute to Greek love between men, though dividing such relationships into ‘chivalrous’ and ‘lustful’ categories and categorizing the latter as ‘vice’. His 1891 A Problem of Modern Ethics argues explicitly for the understanding and decriminalization of homosexuality. Symonds’s influence can be seen in the work of Oscar Wilde, E. M. Forster, and Havelock Ellis, with whom he co-authored the sexological study Sexual Inversion before his death in 1893.





Further reading:

 (Babbington)

(Markgraf)