
TATI, Jacques (b.9 October 1907, Le Pecq, France; d.  5 November 1982,
Paris, France)

Jacques Tati (born Jacques Tatischeff) was a French director and actor.
Despite a very small output  only six feature films and three shorts  he
is considered one of the most influential comedy directors of the 20th
century. He is best known for creating the character of Monsieur Hulot - a
slightly anachronistic, bumbling gentleman - whom he played in four films:
Les Vacances de M. Hulot [M. Hulots Holiday, 1953], Mon Oncle [My Uncle,
1958], Play Time (1967) and Trafic [Traffic, 1971].

Tati had a complex Russian, Dutch, French and Italian ancestry (his
paternal grandfather was a general in the Russian Imperial Army and came
from nobility) and grew up under relatively affluent circumstances.
Nonetheless, by the early 1930s, instead of joining his familys picture
frame business, he had turned to performing, first as a mime and then as a
stage and film actor. One of his most notable early roles was in Ren
Clments 1936 short Soigne ton gauche. Tall and athletic, Tati was always
a physical performer, making great use of his gangly frame in carefully
choreographed displays of social ineptitude which owed a lot to classic
silent comedians like Mack Sennett, Buster Keaton, Max Linder or Stan
Laurel.

In 1947, Tati directed his first film - a short entitled Lcole des
facteurs [The School for Postmen] in which he played an efficiency-obsessed
postman. He would reprise the role two years later in 1949 for his first
feature film, Jour de fte [The Big Day]. A series of scenes and vignettes
revolving around a rural postmans daily routines and somewhat drunken
attempts to emulate the speed and productivity of his American
counterparts, Jour de fte displays all the characteristics of Tatis
style: a very loose narrative, minimal dialogue, and a strong interest in
sight and sound gags.

Tatis next four films feature his signature character, Monsieur Hulot. Les
Vacances de M. Hulot follows him as he bumbles his way through a seaside
resort. In Mon Oncle he is a relic of an old-fashioned Paris struggling to
adapt to a consumerist lifestyle, while bonding with his young nephew. In
his masterpiece, Play Time, a quasi-experimental fable of modern anomie,
Hulot struggles to escape the geometrical confines of a new Paris thats
all sterile cubicles, metal, glass and concrete. In Trafic, he is an
automobile designer harassed by his own creation.

Tatis unique directorial and performing style have always straddled the
border between anachronism and experimentation. His films sometimes appear
to express a populist, antiquated, almost hackneyed, vision of France, and
Mon Oncle was even accused of poujadisme for its perceived antimodernity
and sentimental presentation of a disappearing Paris. At the same time,
Tati was keenly interested in visual and aural innovations. His films
sacrifice plots for tightly constructed gags which explore the geometry and
technology of modernity for both satirical and creative purposes, while
dialogue is substituted with an assortment of expressive organic and
mechanical background noises. At heart, despite the humor of his cinema,
Tati is a skeptic  a critic of modernity and mindless conformity  who
nonetheless displays almost a Dadaists fascination with machinery and
mechanics.

References and Further reading:

Armes, Roy (1970) The Comic Art of Jacques Tati. Screen 11: 68-80

Bazin, Andr (2002) An Interview with Jacques Tati by Andr Bazin, with
the Participation of Franois Truffaut. Quarterly Review of Film & Video
19(4): 285-98

Hilliker, Lee (2002) In the modernist mirror: Jacques Tati and the
Parisian landscape. The French Review, 76.2: 318-329

Select Filmography:

Lcole des facteurs [The School for Postmen, 1947]
Jour de fte [The Big Day, 1949]
Les Vacances de M. Hulot [M. Hulots Holiday, 1953]
Mon Oncle [My Uncle, 1958]
Play Time (1967)
 Trafic [Traffic, 1971].

Paratextual materials:

http://www.tativille.com/ - The official site of the director, maintained
by his nephew
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZO3SIkso0QQ - Trailer for Play Time
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LE9t98Gox60 - A scene from My Uncle

Maria Ioni
Ryerson University

