

Karel Teige was a Czech theoretician of art and architecture, an artist and typographer, and an organiser of the Czech avant-garde. He was one of the founders of Devětsil, an association of Czech avant-garde artists, and a spokesman of the Surrealist Group of Czechoslovakia. He maintained contacts with numerous European avant-garde artists and informed the Czech art milieu about the latest developments. As author of several manifestos and art theories, Teige was instrumental in the emergence of a range of new artistic genres such as picture poems, Poetism, and Artificialism in the 1920s.

Karel Teige was a Czech theoretician of art and architecture, an artist and typographer, and an organiser of the Czech avant-garde. He was one of the founders of Devětsil, an association of Czech avant-garde artists, and a spokesman of the Surrealist Group of Czechoslovakia. He maintained contacts with numerous European avant-garde artists and informed the Czech art milieu about the latest developments. As author of several manifestos and art theories, Teige was instrumental in the emergence of a range of new artistic genres such as picture poems, Poetism, and Artificialism in the 1920s. In his theoretical texts of the 1920s and 1930s, he considered Marxism as the basis for understanding the historical, social, and political aspects of the emergence of modern culture. After his trip to Paris in 1922, he saw modern civilisation as a basic condition for a revolutionary reconstruction of the world and reform of the arts and began to outline a new theoretical system based on the polarity of Constructivism and Poetism (mirroring the Marxian relation between base and superstructure). Technical, rational, economic, and scientific principles of Constructivism were to be enriched with Poetism by adding a poetic vision and transforming the world into a metaphor. 



Influenced by Russian Constructivism, Teige applied Constructivist principles in his ideas about architecture, industrial design, photography, and photomontage, but also in his own work in typography and book design. Under the influence of the Great Depression, he called for a rational functionalism refusing all artistic components of architecture; he famously criticized Le Corbusier’s 1929 Mundaneum project. Rejecting traditional art forms, Teige began to consider new building types for a new (socialist) society and to create his own concept of minimum dwelling. These were introduced in his 1931 Bauhaus lectures on the sociology of architecture and in his 1932 essay ‘Nejmenší byt’ (The Minimum Dwelling), and also shaped his ideas on photography and film such as his 1922 ‘Foto Kino Film’ (Photography Cinema Film).

Poetism, the opposite pole of Teige’s theoretical system of Constructivism, emphasises spontaneity, lyricism, and playfulness. In the first manifesto of Poetism in 1924, he described it as ‘the crown of life’ whose aesthetics ‘is in no way prohibitive and pedantic’ and attempted to resolve a number of artistic opposites, among them high and low, professional and amateur, extraordinary and ordinary, rare and everyday, original and reproduced, image and word. Poetism offered a number of conceptual tools that went beyond high art as it was understood in modernism and highlighted the importance of mechanical reproduction that could democratise life. Book illustration, photography, and photomontage are characterised not only by their reproducibility but also by their anonymity which pertains to collectivity as opposed to bourgeois individualism. Teige explored the issue of reproducibility in the wider context of popular culture outside of the traditional boundaries of high art, he praised phenomena such as circus, sport, dance, avionics, tourism and life itself. In his 1928 Manifest poetismu (Poetism Manifesto), he added the notion of a higher unity of art, poetry for all five senses.



When Teige wrote his first manifesto on Poetism, leading Devětsil artists, among them Josef Šíma, Jindřich Štyrský, and Toyen created their own artistic style, Artificialism, that expresses an interest in unconscious mental processes and psychoanalysis and promotes imaginative painting and biomorphic forms. Teige followed this development and summarized the views of the Devětsil artists in the 1928 essay ‘Abstraktivismus, nadrealismus, artificielismus’ (Abstractivism, Surrealism, Artificialism). He saw many links between Poetism and Artificialism, above all the interrelation of painting and poetry understood as a supremely free creation, something which is reflected in his 1928 essay ‘Utrafialové obrazy čili artificielismus’ (Ultraviolet Paintings or Artificialism).



At the end of the 1920s, Teige moved towards Surrealism although he considered it as a step backwards from avant-garde positions; he found that Poetism and Surrealism share the same goals, human liberation and change of the social order. In 1934, Teige (together with the poet Vítězslav Nezval) became a spokesman of the Surrealist Group of Czechoslovakia and published popularizing texts on surrealism as well as his more fundamental 1945 essay Vnitřní model (The Inner Model).



Selected Works

Modern Architecture in Czechoslovakia and Other Writings. Los Angeles 2000.

Further reading:

(Dluhosch and Švácha)

(Levinger, A Life in Nature: Karel Teige’s Journey from Poetism to Surrealism)

(Levinger, Czech Avant-Garde Art: Poetry for the Five Senses)

(Levinger, Teige on Cinema and Utopia)

(Oakley)

(Švácha, Robová and Ryndová)