WU Yao

PAN Tianshou (潘天壽, 1897-1971)



Pan Tianshou was a twentieth-century Chinese painter, calligrapher, and art teacher. A dedicated advocate of guohua (國畫), he is highly esteemed for his dynamic landscape and bird-and-flower paintings imbued with a literati aesthetic that he has striven to preserve. He maintained Chinese and Western painting should chart separate courses, wrote extensively on Chinese art history and theory, and was committed to the education of Chinese artistic heritage. He directed guohua instruction at the national art academy in Hangzhou from its founding in 1928, and was associated with the school until the time of his death. Pan’s paintings are noted for their bold composition, vigorous application of brushstrokes and ink splashes, sufficient tonal variation, and occasional use of fingers as an unmediated medium, while poetic inscriptions executed in refined calligraphy add an epigraphic flavor that supplement his paintings. After the establishment of People’s Republic of China in 1949, Pan went on government-sponsored sketching expeditions, and his subsequent works were filled with more observed details and greater three-dimensionality. He also created public art of monumental scale that would glorify the beauty of the new nation. Pan was severely persecuted during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) and died in 1971.





List of works



Pan Tianshou. (1926) Zhongguo huihua shi 中國繪畫史 (History of Chinese Painting). Shanghai: Shangwu yinshuguan.



Pan Tianshou. (1983)Pan Tianshou meishu wenji 潘天壽美術文集 (Collection of Pan Tianshou’s Writings on Art). Beijing: Renmin meishu chubanshe.



--- (1996) Pan Tianshou shuhua ji 潘天壽書畫集 (Collected Calligraphies and Paintings by Pan Tianshou). 2 vols. Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin meishu chubanshe.



--- (2004) Pan Tianshou huaji 潘天壽畫集 (Collected Paintings by Pan Tianshou). 2 vols. Beijing: Renmin meishu chubanshe.





References and further reading



Lu Xin, ed. (1989) Pan Tianshou yanjiu 潘天壽研究 (Pan Tianshou: Life and Work). Hangzhou: Zhejiang meishu xueyuan chubanshe.



Lu Xin, ed. (1997) Pan Tianshou yanjiu 潘天壽研究 (Pan Tianshou: Life and Work). Vol. 2. Hangzhou: Zhongguo meishu xueyuan chubanshe.



Pan Gongkai. (2011) Gaofeng jungu: Pan Tianshou huihua yishu 高風峻骨：潘天壽繪畫藝術 (Painting Art of Pan Tianshou). Beijing: Gaodeng jiaoyu chubanshe.



Yang, Xiaoneng. (2010) Tracing the Past, Drawing the Future: Master Ink Painters in Twentieth-Century China. Stanford, CA: Iris & B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts at Stanford University.