

Sanabria is a representative figure of the second generation of 20th century Venezuelan architects. He studied in the United States of America after World War II and had a rigorous functionalist orientation, paying attention to natural conditions, environmental features, the relationship between architecture and geography, the influence of architecture in civic culture, structural and technological expressiveness and the links between architecture, art and the urban scale.

After graduating as engineer (1941-1945) at the Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV), he embraced a functionalist approach during his studies (1945-1947) at the Harvard Graduate School of Design in Cambridge, Massachusetts. At Harvard Walter Gropius, Martin Wagner, Ieoh Ming Pei, Hugh Stubbins and Marcel Breuer were among his professors. He returned to Venezuela in 1947 and worked as professor of Architecture for Engineers at the UCV's School of Engineering. By 1948 he was Director of the Department of Architectural Composition at the School of Architecture in the Faculty of Engineering. In 1954, he became the first Director of the School of Architecture in the Faculty of Architecture and Urbanism, founded that year.

Sanabria is a representative figure of the second generation of 20th century Venezuelan architects. He studied in the United States of America after World War II and had a rigorous functionalist orientation, paying attention to natural conditions, environmental features, the relationship between architecture and geography, the influence of architecture in civic culture, structural and technological expressiveness and the links between architecture, art and the urban scale.

After graduating as engineer (1941-1945) at the Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV), he embraced a functionalist approach during his studies (1945-1947) at the Harvard Graduate School of Design in Cambridge, Massachusetts. At Harvard Walter Gropius, Martin Wagner, Ieoh Ming Pei, Hugh Stubbins and Marcel Breuer were among his professors. He returned to Venezuela in 1947 and worked as professor of Architecture for Engineers at the UCV's School of Engineering. By 1948 he was Director of the Department of Architectural Composition at the School of Architecture in the Faculty of Engineering. In 1954, he became the first Director of the School of Architecture in the Faculty of Architecture and Urbanism, founded that year.

His belief that buildings should create urban spaces is related to an emphasis on the constructive quality of buildings and care for natural acclimatisation, using spaces and technical elements for better light and ventilation. It was his way of facing the diffusion of the curtain wall and artificially-achieved environmental comfort endorsed by the ‘International Style’.

His major works in the early 1950s were the Electricidad de Caracas company headquarters (1952) and the Humboldt Hotel (1956). The latter was the geometric and visual pivot of the Comprehensive Plan of Avila National Park (Caracas’ most scenographic mountain range) and also a milestone of modern Venezuelan architecture.


In the following decades, two fundamental works of the capital city’s centre are derived from Sanabria’s ideas: the Central Bank of Venezuela (1960-1961 / 1973-1975) and the National Institute for Educational Cooperation (1963-1968), both characterised by the rational introduction of sunscreens, the creation of spaces that serve as elements of transition with the city, the inclusion of artworks in public spaces and the structural identity of untreated concrete's architectural volume. An even more dynamic volumetric combination, influenced by Le Corbusier and projected into the urban environment, is represented by the new Electricidad de Caracas building (1975-1977) and the National Library of Venezuela and General Archives of the Nation (1977-1983), conceived as the heart of a massive environmental and urban renewal (Forum Libertador) plan for Caracas’ historic core. The complex, located near the Nation's Pantheon of Heroes was designed as part of a Master Plan for the long-term urban and civic revitalisation of Venezuela’s capital city.

Sanabria won the National Architecture Award in 1967 and played an important role in Venezuela's territorial and urban planning as a member of the Metropolitan Advisory Office of Urban Planning (1964-1976), the Commission for the Development of the Capital Region and new cities (1974), the Conservative Board of Artistic and Historical Heritage (1976) and the National Academy of Engineering, Architecture and Habitat (1998).

Further reading:

 (Diccionario de las Artes Visuales en Venezuela) 



(Posani)