

Ferdinand Tönnies was central to the professionalization of European sociology, co-founding the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Soziologie (German Society for Sociology) in 1909, along with Max Weber and Georg Simmel (Adair-Toteff 2005). He was born in 1855 in rural Schleswig (present-day Germany) to a family of Lutheran pastors and cattle breeders; he died in urban Kiel, Germany, in 1936. He is best known for proposing that Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft form a constitutive binary of modernity (Tönnies 1957). Gemeinschaft (community) is an organic social form typified by village life historically and family life generally, where people are bound in mutual dependency, custom, and shared experience.

Ferdinand Tönnies was central to the professionalization of European sociology, co-founding the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Soziologie (German Society for Sociology) in 1909, along with Max Weber and Georg Simmel (Adair-Toteff 2005). He was born in 1855 in rural Schleswig (present-day Germany) to a family of Lutheran pastors and cattle breeders; he died in urban Kiel, Germany, in 1936. He is best known for proposing that Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft form a constitutive binary of modernity (Tönnies 1957). Gemeinschaft (community) is an organic social form typified by village life historically and family life generally, where people are bound in mutual dependency, custom, and shared experience. In contrast, Gesellschaft (society) is an artificial social form where individuals enter and exit associations frequently and voluntarily; the city-dweller is famously freed from obligations of blood and tradition, which restrict and support the villager. Tönnies argued that such freedoms carry a cost to the city-dweller, who is prone to atomization and alienation. Tönnies’ portrait of Gemeinschaft served to highlight the shortcomings, even pathological attributes, of modern society (Löwy and Sayre 2001). Tönnies believed that the movement from Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft was historically inevitable – the human values of village life were doomed to disappear.



List of Works

(1957 [1887]) Community and Society (Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft), ed. and trans. C. P. Loomis, East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.

(1961 [1909]) Custom: An Essay on Social Codes, trans. A. Farrell Borenstein, New York: Free Press. 

(1974) On Social Ideas and Ideologies, trans. and ed. E. G. Jacoby, New York: Harper & Row.

Further reading:

(Adair-Toteff)

(Liebersohn)

(Löwy and Sayre)