
                                [pic]       



Georg Trakl (1887-1914)

Georg Trakl was a turn-of-the-century Austrian poet remembered for the
turbulence of his life as well as the diverse legacies of his work.  An
inaugural poet of German Expressionism, Trakl startled with his bold use of
figurative language and in particular a pronounced interest in synesthesia,
as if to suggest that the senses themselves were in a kind of metaphorical
interplay.

Trakls biography includes an incestuous entanglement with his sister as
well as a recurrent drug addiction that oddly foreshadows the death by
cocaine overdose he would incur while undergoing psychiatric treatment for
traumatic experiences on the battlefield of the First World War.  As a
recent medical school graduate, the twenty-six year old Trakl had himself
been assigned to treat the wounded of the Austro-Hungarian Army.

Besides leading to his death, what Trakl witnessed on the eastern front
also provided him with his most anthologized poem, Grodek, a lyrical
meditation occasioned by the battle of the same name.  Trakls poem differs
markedly from the war poetry of his English contemporaries Sassoon, Brooke
and Auden by withholding overt judgment while focusing on the cognitive-
sensory experience of destruction.  Grodek climaxes famously in the
impressionistic aphorism Alle Straen mnden in schwarze Verwesung [All
roads flow into black decay (Stillmark 127)] which in typical Trakl-esque
fashion assigns a color to an abstraction and allows a local landscape
detail to leap into the register of the cosmic.

Trakls techniques were bound to attract the attention of philosophers
concerned with the nature of language and with its limits.  Indeed Trakl,
along with Romantic-era predecessor Friedrich Hlderlin and contemporaries
Gottfried Benn and Stefan George, helped to inspire Martin Heideggers
exploration of poetic language as a revelation of being.  Heidegger held
that the scientific, conceptual cast of philosophy since Plato had led
western culture to overlook the being of beings in favor of their
serviceability to the ordering intellectand looked to poetry to recover a
pre-conceptual encounter with things of the world.  Heidegger quotes
Trakls enigmatic poem Ein Winterabend [A Winter Evening]:

            Someone among the wanderers
            Approaches the door, on dark paths.
            The tree of the graces blossoms
            From the cool sap of the earth.

            Wanderer, come quietly inside;
            Pain petrified the threshold.
            There, gleaming in pure clarity,
            On the table, are bread and wine.

Immediately striking in this poem are the sudden intrusion of a
mythological motif on an otherwise ordinary, albeit idyllic, scene; the
ensuing direct address to the newcomer; the abrupt declaration that pain
petrifies the threshold, and the closing image of bread and wine blending
the everyday and the sacramental.  Heidegger allegorizes the poem as an
invocation of poetrys revelatory vocation, announcing to the reader the
sacrament already carried out in the clarity of its language.  This
endeavor to make Trakls poetry the mouthpiece of a charismatic
phenomenology prompted Jacques Derridas deconstructive reading aiming to
defend the poet from the (other) philosophers.


Key Works

AUTHOR: Please provide a chronological list of 2-4 key works here.  Title
and publication date only; if English translations exist, give title and
first publication date as well.

Georg Trakl, Dichtungen und Briefe, 1969.

_____, Poetry and Prose: a Bilingual Edition, trans. Alexander Stillmark,
2005.

_____, Poems, trans. Stephen Tapscott, 2011.

References and further readings

Martin Heidegger (1971) Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Alfred
Hofstadter, New York: Harper & Row.

Jacques Derrida (1991) Of Spirit: Heidegger and the Question, trans.
Geoffrey Bennington and Rachel Bowlby, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press.


Image source: sterreichisches Nationalbibliothek Wien, Bildarchiv
#11288415 Pf 7.728: C(2); date unknown.
