
Tucker, Albert (1914  1999)

Albert Tucker was a modern Australian painter, known best for his series of
works depicting the horrors of wartime and harsh images of the Australian
landscape. Tucker was an artist of seemingly irreconcilable contrasts. He
was a social conservative who in his youth flirted with the Communist
Party. He was a master draughtsman and charming illustrator, yet produced
challenging works that are, to many viewers, dense and unfathomable. A
child of the depression, he knew hardship, yet clung firmly to his middle-
class values and a fierce determination to succeed financially. With an
often-forbidding public persona, he was also known as a man of great charm
and personal warmth. Largely self-educated, he worked first as a commercial
artist, illustrator and cartoonist, before falling in with young modernist
contemporaries Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd and the Heide circle
surrounding John and Sunday Reed. An artist of uncompromising
determination, he was to gain the reputation and financial reward he always
saw as his due. As the mythos surrounding the world of Heide and the Angry
Penguins continues to grow, so does Tuckers place in Australian art, now
firmly recognised in a permanent gallery in his name at the Heide Museum of
Modern Art in Melbourne.

Tuckers early work was informed by his experiences of the depression and
the outbreak of war in 1939. After a short period of military service in
1942, he spent most of the war years developing a series of motifs that
would challenge everything he had known of art to that point. His Images of
Modern Evil series is an angry cry against the decline of human values in
wartime. While effectively unsaleable, they became the basis on which all
of his future art was built. Tucker left Australia in 1948 and travelled to
London before settling in Paris. He painted and exhibited widely without
making great headway, mainly because the uncompromising darkness of his
imagery was out of step with a resurgent Europe rebuilding after the long
years of war. The breakthrough came in 1956, in a joint exhibition with
Sidney Nolan in Rome. Invigorated by Nolans bright images of the
Australian outback, Tucker returned to his Australian roots. He created new
works around the themes of bushrangers, explorers, and mythical beings in a
bush context. While Nolan had opted for a slick and glossy paint surface
using the new medium PVA (Polyvinyl Acetate), Tucker used the same material
to bind sand, gravel, cardboard and other materials into a gritty three-
dimensional surface.

[pic]

Albert Tucker, Explorers Fording the River, 1958, oil on canvas, 91.5 x
125.4 cm, Newcastle Art Gallery. Copyright to be sought from: Barbara
Tucker, 3 Crestmont Crt, Toorak, VIC, Australia, 3142. Ph: +61 3 9822 7678.

Returning to Australia in 1960, Tucker settled in a bush retreat at
Hurstbridge, just outside Melbourne. He depicted the trees and wildlife
around him while developing a new iconography based on biblical and
mythological stories. Fauns, explorers, and craggy bushmen seem gouged
directly from the land, indistinguishable from the earth they inhabit. His
masked and helmeted figures are part man and part fissured rock; ancient
heads carved from the stony landscape and a new sense of colour replaced
the dominant black of earlier works. In his later years, Tucker painted a
wide range of subjects, from mellow landscapes and bird studies to re-
imaginings of his gritty wartime nightmares.

References and Further Reading

Fry, Gavin. (2006) Albert Tucker, Sydney: Beagle Press.

Mollison , James and Minchin, Jan. (1990) Albert Tucker: A Retrospective,
Melbourne: National Gallery of Victoria.

