
Gonzlez Tun, Ral (1905-1974)

(Photo: http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-Z_bMBjAluCg/UaDUJB7lDXI/AAAAAAAACOo/F-
pY6EbN0ws/s400/raul+gonzales+tu%C3%B1on.jpg)

Ral Gonzlez Tun, Argentinean poet and journalist, was one of the main
exponents in the countrys literary avant-garde of the 1920s. His poetic
work is strongly influenced by key European modernist writers, many of whom
he personally met while living in France and Spain, such as Miguel
Hernndez, Federico Garca Lorca, Rafael Alberti, Robert Desnos. Since his
youth, Tun was highly committed to the communist cause and fervently
fought for his ideals in his life and his writing. A militant anti-fascist
he participated in and reported on important protests and events, such as
the Spanish Civil War. He was also a good friend of Pablo Neruda, with whom
he shared a home for some years in Chile. He was the younger brother of
Enrique Gonzlez Tun, another prominent Argentinean journalist and
writer.

Apart from a prolific writer, Tun was a passionate and incessant
traveler. Already in his youth, he travelled around most of Argentina, and
later he was to travel professionally as a correspondent for different
newspapers. Everywhere he went he became deeply involved with the problems
and injustices suffered by people, and actively participated in many local
conflicts. From these experiences, no doubt, comes his extreme skill in
observing detail and depicting the beauty of the marginal and the
commonplace. Tun is famous for his fictional alter-ego Juancito Caminador
(literal Spanish translation of Johnny Walker), a walking observer of all
the forgotten corners of the world, inspired by a circus artist and the
famous whisky label. His poetry is friendly and conversational, written in
a language full of questions, exclamations and popular sayings that seems
to speak directly to the reader. As has often been observed, his vision is
profoundly Argentinean, and his poems have a sad and cordial Argentinean
tone. During his stay in Paris, Tun was strongly influenced by surrealism
and was one of the first to introduce this artistic trend into Argentinean
poetry. Transcending literary genres, Tuns verses mix poetry, fictional
narrative, journalistic reports, and tango and song lyrics in a sort of
militant poetry that seeks to rewrite history in favor of the weak.

Tun published his first collection of poems, El violin del Diablo, in
1926 and between that year and the late nineteen sixties he published more
than twenty collections of poems, some of the most important of which are
La rosa blindada and La calle del agujero en la media. The latter, which is
the result of his stay in Paris, is considered his main work. Tuns
poetic and journalistic production was intimately linked to some of the
most prominent literary journals of his time. He became part of the
editorial board of Proa, a journal founded in 1922 by Jorge Luis Borges,
and contributed avidly to Martn Fierro, both of which played a key role in
the development of the Argentinean avant-garde movement. Tun was also
involved in the opposition between the so-called groups of Boedo and
Florida, corresponding to two different districts and artistic movements in
Buenos Aires (lower class, socialist Boedo and upper-class, modernist
Florida). Tun is usually considered an author bridging the gap between
these two, since his formal innovation is more in agreement with the
Florida group, while the themes of his poetry and prose show a great
affinity with the ideals of Boedo. As a journalist he worked many years for
the paper Crtica and later for Clarn, where he wrote pieces on many
subjects, such as art criticism, travels, sports, and political conflicts.





Selected Poetical Works

El violn del diablo, 1926

Mircoles de ceniza, 1928

La calle del agujero en la media, 1930

Poemas de Juancito Caminador, 1934

La rosa blindada, 1936

Caprichos de Juancito Caminador, 1941

Himno de plvora, 1943

Primer canto argentino, 1945

El rumbo de las islas perdidas, 1969

El banco de la plaza, 1977 (posthumous)

Los melanclicos canales del tiempo, 1977 (posthumous)

La luna con gatillo, Selection from 1967



References and Further Reading

Prieto, Adolfo (ed.). El peridico Martn Fierro. Buenos Aires: Galerna,
1968.

Salas, Horacio. Conversaciones con Ral Gonzlez Tun. Buenos Aires: La
Bastilla, 1975.

Ferrari, Germn. Ral Gonzlez Tun periodista. Buenos Aires: Ediciones
del CCC, 2006.



Material on the net

Short biography and some of his main poems published on:
http://www.paginadepoesia.com.ar/clas_ar_tunion.html#10

Chronicle written on the occasion of the execution of anarchist Severino Di
Giovanni in Buenos Aires (1931):
http://www.agenciapacourondo.com.ar/secciones/cultura/10568-2013-02-02-16-
31-47.html

Some of his poems put to music by Cuarteto Cedrn can be listened to on
http://www.lastfm.it/music/Cuarteto+Cedr%C3%B3n/_/Ra%C3%BAl+Gonz%C3%A1lez+Tu
%C3%B1%C3%B3n

Juancito Caminador put to music and sung by Mercedes Sosa:
http://latorredebabel.wordpress.com/2011/12/21/juancito-caminador-ral-
gonzlez-tun/





