

Turkish War of Independence (1919-1923)

Kurtuluş Savaşı

After the defeat of the Ottoman Empire by the Allied forces at the end of World War I, the Mudros armistice was signed in 1918, culminating in the partitioning of Ottoman territories by the Allies, who occupied the straits, eastern Thrace, and several regions in Anatolia. Encouraged by the Allies, the Greek army sought to annex territories in Western Anatolia, and occupied Smyrna (Izmir) on May 15, 1919. Following this landing, demobilized Turkish military units and irregulars launched a national resistance campaign, with former army officer Mustafa Kemal at its head. After the Allies occupied Istanbul (the Ottoman capital) on April 23, 1920, Mustafa Kemal inaugurated a provisional government in Ankara.

After the defeat of the Ottoman Empire by the Allied forces at the end of World War I, the Mudros armistice was signed in 1918, culminating in the partitioning of Ottoman territories by the Allies, who occupied the straits, eastern Thrace, and several regions in Anatolia. Encouraged by the Allies, the Greek army sought to annex territories in Western Anatolia, and occupied Smyrna (Izmir) on May 15, 1919. Following this landing, demobilized Turkish military units and irregulars launched a national resistance campaign, with former army officer Mustafa Kemal at its head. After the Allies occupied Istanbul (the Ottoman capital) on April 23, 1920, Mustafa Kemal inaugurated a provisional government in Ankara. As a result of the Greco-Turkish War, the Greek army was defeated decisively on August 30, 1922, and Smyrna was liberated on September 9, 1922. The new Turkish National Assembly abolished the sultanate on November 1, 1922. With the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne on July 24, 1923, the occupation of Istanbul and eastern Thrace ended, and the independence of the new Turkish state was internationally recognized. On October 29, 1923, Turkey was officially declared a Republic, and Mustafa Kemal was elected its first president.

Further reading:

(Zürcher)