

Composer Alban Berg (1885-1935) is best-known for his two operas, Wozzeck (premiered 1925) and Lulu (left unfinished but performed in incomplete form until the full premiere in 1979, as completed by Friedrich Cerha) and his Violin Concerto (premiered 1936). Berg's oeuvre consists of his opus 1-7 and then, without opus numbers, pre-Opus 1 songs, incomplete pieces, and arrangements, added by archival and sketch study.



Composer Alban Berg (1885-1935) is best-known for his two operas, Wozzeck (premiered 1925) and Lulu (left unfinished but performed in incomplete form until the full premiere in 1979, as completed by Friedrich Cerha) and his Violin Concerto (premiered 1936). Berg's oeuvre consists of his opus 1-7 and then, without opus numbers, pre-Opus 1 songs, incomplete pieces, and arrangements, added by archival and sketch study.



Berg lived in Vienna, Austria, and took part in the remarkable intellectual and cultural activity of the era. Along with his teacher Arnold Schoenberg (from 1904) and his colleague in the Second Viennese School, Anton Webern, Berg began composing in the expansive style of tonality and form exemplified by composers Richard Wagner, Johannes Brahms, and Gustav Mahler. He moved to the initially aphoristic style labeled atonal (1908), then to the Neoclassical style, which incorporates twelve-tone techniques (1923).



Berg began by composing songs, and he later orchestrated and published several of these songs in ‘The Seven Early Songs’ (1928).  In his initial studies with Schoenberg, he developed his instrumental writing skills, and he completed the Piano Sonata Opus 1, the Four Songs Opus 2 and the String Quartet Opus 3 under Schoenberg's tutelage. The fourth song of Opus marks Berg's first atonal work, and this compositional period includes the subsequent string quartet, then the five orchestral songs entitled ‘The Altenberg Lieder,’ the four Clarinet Pieces Opus 5, and the three Orchestral Pieces Opus 6, which in some respects are studies for the following opera Wozzeck.



Berg composed his first opera Wozzeck while in military service in the First World War, and while his health precluded a combat role, Berg reflected some of his army experiences in the story of the soldier Wozzeck, which is based on Berg's adaptation of a play by Georg Buchner from 1837. In spite of his success with Wozzeck, Berg began to adapt Schoenberg's twelve-tone techniques in his subsequent Chamber Concerto for Piano, Violin and Winds, second string quartet the Lyric Suite, the commissioned Concert Aria Der Wein, on texts by Baudelaire.  In 1905, Berg had seen a performance of Frank Wedekind's "Erdgeist", the first of the two Lulu plays (followed by ‘Pandora' s Box’.)  Berg began work on his second opera, Lulu, in 1927, interrupted by Der Wein and in 1935 by the commission of the Violin Concerto by Louis Krasner.  Berg dedicated the concerto to the ‘memory of an Angel’, Manon Gropius, the daughter of Alma Mahler and Walter Gropius who died at age 18.  The integration of the Berg Chorale ‘Es ist Genug’ in the final movement of the concerto reflected this dedication, but also turned out to be Berg's own epitaph, as he died shortly after the concerto was completed, leaving Lulu incomplete.



Berg had a daughter Albine with Marie Scheuchl (1903), married Helene Nahowski in 1911, and from 1925 had a relationship with Hanna Fuchs-Robettin, sister-in-law of Alma Mahler. Berg had asthma and generally troubled health, and died in 1935 from an infection originating in an insect sting. Revelations of Berg's life and the extent of his engagement with his contemporaries have emerged since the 1970's, but a complete biography has yet to be written. Berg's publisher is Universal Edition of Vienna, and a critical edition of Berg's music and writings, Alban Berg: Sämliche Werke, is in the process of publication by the Berg Foundation (Alban Berg Stiftung) in three series: compositions, analyses, and writings. 



 The principal proponents of Berg's music have been his pupils, Willi Reich and Theodor W. Adorno, and American composer and theorist George Perle. Analysis and interpretation of Berg's music begins with the composer's own writings on the music of Schoenberg and others, his commentary on contemporary issues surrounding music and art, and his sketches, notes, and letters detailing the compositional processes in his own music. Berg's writings were presented and interpreted initially by Reich and Adorno, and later by Hans Redlich, Perle, Douglas Jarman, Mark DeVoto, and others. The attention to form and detail in Berg's music and analytical writings, particularly in his lecture on Wozzeck, is reflected in Adorno's description of Berg as ‘the master of the smallest link’ (‘Der Meister des kleinsten Übergangs’) Adorno (1971) describes how the continual dissolution of motives is linked to the large-scale formal process. The alignments of "interval cycles" in a letter from Berg to Schoenberg (July 17, 1920) mark a starting point for Perle's comprehensive accounting of the cyclic and symmetrical formations that characterize all aspects of Berg's compositions, and in Perle's compositional realization of the implications of Berg's musical language in his system of twelve-tone tonality.  The cyclic nature of Berg's music, found in pitch, rhythmic, formal, and serial elements throughout Berg's works, spans the alignments of cycles in the melodic and harmonic successions in the songs Opus 2, to the "Leitmotive" and "Leitsektions" of music associated with the central characters in Wozzeck, to the derivations of row material from a central row for the characters in Lulu and to the underlying basis of the row of the Violin Concerto in the open strings of the violin. Berg's self-conscious adoption of such ordering procedures, along with other number-based systems organizing every aspect from tempo and numbers of measures through large-scale formal transformation, leads to Adorno's description that "Few things are as noticeable in Berg as the combination of near imponderable subtlety with planning so manic that it reaches the point of number games." 

The reception of Berg's music follows a path from his relatively unknown status to virtual overnight success with his first opera Wozzeck, then decline with the restrictions imposed by the Second World War and its aftermath.   In the 1950s, Berg's music was largely ignored in favor of his colleague, Webern, who was felt to represent the future, which Berg along with Schoenberg were regarded as too mired in the failed past.  With the broadening views of the 1960s, the emerging scholarship and advocacy of George Perle and Douglas Jarman, the "re-discovery" of important works such as the Altenberg Lieder Opus 4 by Mark DeVoto, the formation of the Alban Berg Society in 1968 with a board including Igor Stravinsky, and Leonard Bernstein's championing of Berg's musical forefather, Mahler, Berg's initial position as the most "popular" composer of his school, but with added respect for the complexity of his compositional craft, was re-established. In 1977, sketch study by Douglass M. Green and Douglas Jarman, and Perle's discovery of an annotated score of the Lyric Suite, a work with a public dedication to Zemlinky's Lyric Symphony, but a secret dedication to Hanna Fuchs-Robettin, started a research direction that has revealed the extent to which Berg reflected his life in his music.  In his combination of an intensely personal expression with the systematic techniques of cycles and serial procedures, Berg's music is now seen as a significant assimilation of the romantic past with the modernist present.  



Editions and Complete Works



http://www.universaledition.com/Alban-Berg/composers-and-works /composer /51 	/worklist/?sort=0#page=1. Accessed March 26, 2012.



http://www.albanbergstiftung.at/zurausgabe.html.  Accessed June 22, 2012.

	The Alban Berg Stiftung Site has more information on the Gesamtausgabe.



Writings

	

DeVoto, Mark, translator. Alban Berg: Arnold Schönberg: Gurrelieder: Führer, Grosse Ausgabe; Alban Berg: Arnold Schönberg: Pelleas und Melisande op. 5: Kurze thematische Analyse; 	Alban Berg: Arnold Schönberg: Kammersymphonie op. 9: Thematische Analyse; and [Author uncertain]: Arnold Schönbergs Fis-moll Quartett: Eine technische Analyse. Journal of the Arnold Schoenberg Institute 16, nos. 1-2 (June-November 1993, published spring 1995).



Glaube, Hoffnung, und Liebe: Alban Berg Schriften zur Musik. Compiled with introduction by Frank Schneider. Leipzig: Reclam, 1981.



Rauchhaupt, Ursula von, Editor. Die Streichquartette der Wiener Schule: Eine Dokumentation. Munich: Deutsche Grammophon, 1971.



Correspondence



Correspondence: Alban Berg and Theodor Wiesengrund-Adorno. Edited by Henry Lonitz. Translated by Wieland Hoban. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2005.



Soma Morgenstern. Alban Berg und seine Idole. Lüneburg: Klampen, 1995.



The Berg-Schoenberg Correspondence: Selected Letters. Edited by Juliane Brand, Christopher Hailey, and Donald Harris. New York: Norton, 1987. 



Alban Berg : Letters to His Wife. Edited, translated, and annotated by Bernard Grun. London: Faber, 1971.



Life and Times



Alban Berg and his World. Edited by Christopher Hailey. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 	2010. 



Jarman, Douglas. "'Man hat auch nur Fleisch und Blut': Toward a Berg Biography." Gable and Morgan 1991: 11-24.



Berg, Erich Alban. Der unverbesserliche Romantiker Alban Berg. Vienna: Österreichischer Bundesverlag, 1985.



Societies and Secret Programs



International Alban Berg Society Newsletter, 1966-85, volumes I-X.

Alban Berg Studien, 1980-present. Bd 1-6.



Dalen, Brenda. "'Freundschaft, Liebe, und Welt': The Secret Programme of the Chamber 	Concerto." in Jarman 1989: 141-180.



Jarman, Douglas. "Alban Berg, Wilhelm Fliess and the Secret Programme of the Violin Concerto. International Alban Berg Society Newsletter 12 (1982): 5-11.



Perle, George. "The Secret Program of the Lyric Suite." International Alban Berg Society Newsletter 5 (1977): 4-12. Republished with a postscript in The Musical Times, 118 nos. 1614 (August 1977), 1615 (September 1977), and 1616.

 

Green, Douglass M. "Berg's De Profundis: The Finale of the Lyric Suite. International Alban Berg Society Newsletter 5 (1977): 13-23.

	

Reception



Whittall, Arnold. "Berg and the twentieth century." Pople 1997: 247-60.



Burkholder, Peter. "Berg and the Possibility of Popularity." In Gable and Morgan 1991: 25-56.



Analytical Studies



General



Jarman, Douglas. "Alban Berg: The Origins of a Method." Music Analysis 6, no. 3 (Oct. 1987): 	273-88.



Perle, George. "Berg's Master Array of the Interval Cycles." The Musical Quarterly 63, no. 1 	(Jan. 1977): 1-30.



Books and Collections



The Cambridge Companion to Berg. Edited by Anthony Pople. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 



Adorno, Theodor W. Alban Berg, Master of the Smallest Link. Translated with an introduction and annotation by Juliane Brand and Christopher Hailey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. Originally Alban Berg: Der Meister des kleinsten Übergangs (1968).

Alban Berg: Historical and Analytical Perspectives. Edited by David Gable and Robert P. Morgan. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. 



Headlam, Dave. The Music of Alban Berg. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996.



Jarman, Douglas, Editor. The Berg Companion. Macmillan: Houndslow, Basingstoke, London: 1989 (also Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1989).  	



Jarman, Douglas. The Music of Alban Berg. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985.



Reich, Willi. Alban Berg. Translated by Cornelius Cardew. London: Thames and Hudson, 1965.



Redlich, Hans. Alban Berg: The Man and the Musician. London: John Calder, 1957.

English edition is a “transcription and condensation” of German version, Alban Berg:Versuch einer Würdigung.



Sketch Study



Hall, Patricia. A View of Berg’s Lulu Through the Autograph Sources. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.



Hall, Patricia. Berg's Wozzeck. Studies in Musical Genesis, Structure, and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.



Operas



Perle, George. The Operas of Alban Berg: Volume One: Wozzeck. Berkeley: University of 	California Press, 1980. Volume Two: Lulu. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985.



Bibliographies



Simms, Bryan. Alban Berg:  A Research and Information Guide. 1996 first ed. Composer 	Resource Manuals in the Garland Reference Library.  New York: Garland.



Jarman, Douglas.  "Alban Berg" in Grove Music Online.



OUP Online Bibliographies. "Alban Berg" by Dave Headlam, 2012.





Further reading:

[Enter citations for further reading here]