

Born in 1936 in Kyosangnamdo, South Korea, Lee Ufan is a painter, sculptor, writer, and philosopher. He moved to Japan during his studies at the College of Fine Arts at the Seoul National University in 1956, later earning a degree in Philosophy from Nihon University in 1961. Ufan came to prominence as one of the precursors of the Mono-ha [School of Things] movement in the late 1960s. One of Japan’s first avant-garde movements to be recognised internationally, the Mono-ha school of thought rejected Western notions of representation and focused instead on the nature of materials and their interrelations. Ufan was also a pioneering member of the Tansaekhwa [monochrome painting] school in Korea. Working through the confines of minimal intervention and restraint in object manipulation, his works often depict the interactions between his material’s rawness. Ufan was awarded the UNESCO prize at the Shanghai Biennale in 2000. He currently divides his time between Kamakura, Japan and Paris, France.

Born in 1936 in Kyosangnamdo, South Korea, Lee Ufan is a painter, sculptor, writer, and philosopher. He moved to Japan during his studies at the College of Fine Arts at the Seoul National University in 1956, later earning a degree in Philosophy from Nihon University in 1961. Ufan came to prominence as one of the precursors of the Mono-ha [School of Things] movement in the late 1960s. One of Japan’s first avant-garde movements to be recognised internationally, the Mono-ha school of thought rejected Western notions of representation and focused instead on the nature of materials and their interrelations. Ufan was also a pioneering member of the Tansaekhwa [monochrome painting] school in Korea. Working through the confines of minimal intervention and restraint in object manipulation, his works often depict the interactions between his material’s rawness. Ufan was awarded the UNESCO prize at the Shanghai Biennale in 2000. He currently divides his time between Kamakura, Japan and Paris, France.

Further reading:

 (BTAP)



(Mochizuki, Doi and Sasaki)



(Yŏng-na)