
Underground cinema

Juan A Surez (University of Murcia, Spain)

Underground is a label applied to the outer fringes of the radical film
spectrum: films whose form, subject matter, or both, challenge conventional
cinematic habits. When the term first gained currency in the realm of
experimental film, in early 1960s United States, underground implicitly
glamorized these films marginality and suggested a clandestine quality
that went well with the prosecution to which some titles were then subject,
particularly those dealing with nudity and more or less explicit
(homo)sexuality, such as Jack Smiths Flaming Creatures (1963) and Kenneth
Angers Scorpio Rising (1963). Nowadays the term is still currentthere are
Underground Film Festivals in London, Los Angeles, Chicago, Denver,
Brisbane, Calgary, New York, and Lausanne, among many other locations. It
is used to designate unconventional film at large, from the works of
classic underground filmmakers such as Kenneth Anger or Stan Brakhage, made
in an artisanal manner outside the industry, to titles by art directors
such as Luis Buuel and R. W. Fassbinder, who operated within industrial
frameworks.

Historical Emergence and Aesthetics

As a historical category, underground refers primarily to the
experimental films made in the United States from the late 1950s to the
late 1960s, the time of a considerable boom in experimental film
production. This boom brought together modernist experimentation and street
cultures: the underground replayed the experimental film aesthetics of the
beginning of the twentieth century but it was also imbued with the
liberationist ethos of a number of contemporary counter-cultures: hipster
and experimental jazz culture, beat literature and art, artistic
bohemianism, and styles and sensibilities emanating from a subterranean gay
male world.

The underground combined the influence of the post-World War II avant-
garde, a surrealist-influenced, highly subjective style of film one of
whose primary modes was what critic P. Adams Sitney called the trance
film, with the factual orientation of the more recent New American Cinema,
the feature length, low-budged, independent narrative films that operated
as a sort of American New Wave. From the New American Cinema the
underground borrowed the interest in quotidian observation, which it
cultivated in films often lacking a storyline or character-centered action.
Ken Jacobs 1960s films (Little Stabs at Happiness, 1958-60, Window, 1964,
or Soft Rain, 1968) abound in such style of disaggregated actuality. From
the trance film, the underground borrowed a considerable subjectivism,
elliptical expression, and the disregard for conventional film grammar.

The underground also prolonged the older avant-gardes taste for short
pieces, easier to develop on extremely low budgets. While the New American
Cinema movement relied on feature-length narratives with identifiable
characters and storiesJohn Cassavettess Shadows (1959) is the exemplary
titleunderground filmmakers produced mostly shorts. Exceptions were Jack
Smiths unfinished Normal Love, Stan Brakhages Dog Star Man (1961-64),
Jonas Mekass diary films, and most of Andy Warhols titles, many of which
were feature length, with several (Sleep, 1963, Empire, 1964, or The
Chelsea Girls, 1966) notoriously exceeding standard duration. Still, none
of these had conventional narratives.

Jonas Mekas, main champion and eminent commentator of 1960s experimental
film, postulated in 1962 the demise of the New American Cinema and its
replacement by the fresher underground: the living, exploring, changing
frontier, the Vietnam of cinema. On this changing frontier thrived a
motley group of largely male filmmakers of diverse ages, provenances, and
backgrounds. Most of them had received no formal film training and had
started their artistic trajectories as poets or painters. Some were
experienced veterans who had been active since the 1940s, as was the case
with Marie Menken, Kenneth Anger, or Gregory Markopoulos; others, such as
Andy Warhol, Ken Jacobs, Jack Smith, Jonas Mekas, Barbara Rubin, or Storm
De Hirsch, had their film debuts in the late 1950s or early 1960s. Artists
such as Stan Brakhage and Christopher MacLaine bridged the gap between the
two generations. Brakhage had started making films in the early 1950s in
the style of the 1940s avant-garde and worked briefly as an assistant to
surrealist artist Joseph Cornell, with whom he made the city film The
Wonder Ring (1955); in the late 1950s, he started making non-narrative
works in his signature gestural camera that would prove enormously
inspirational to later filmmakers. For his part, Christopher MacLaine made
films in San Francisco, in the early and mid-1950s, in a style that
anticipated the 1960s underground.

Modes and Styles

The underground encompassed quite a variety of films: lyrical sketches,
rudimentary narratives, diary films of the everyday life of their makers
and their friends, idiosyncratic documentaries, and baroque recreations of
the affect and iconography of classical Hollywood, with many titles that
could belong in several, if not all of these categories. Ken Jacobs
monumental Star-Spangled to Death, for example, filmed during the late
1950s and given definite shape in 2004, is at once a ferocious satire of
some Hollywood clichs, a documentary of Jacobss and his friends deranged
antics, a lyrical evocation of details of their lives, and a diary of its
own production. Similarly, Jack Smiths Flaming Creatures and many of
George and Mike Kuchars films may be seen at once as parodies of Hollywood
and as documentaries of the lifestyles and aspirations of their makers.

Often discussed as an episode of American avant-garde history, the
underground had a broad international reach. This was in part because of
the contagious example set by American artists, who ventured into film with
little or no training and minimal budgets, and in part because the
combination of technological access (16mm film cameras, cheap film stock),
disaffection toward the mainstream, and radical aesthetic aspiration
recurred in many other national settings outside the United States. Shaped
by local artistic cultures and experimental film traditions, and animated
by autocthonous styles of social revolt, various film undergrounds emerged
during the late 1960 and 1970s in such disparate places as Mexico City,
Barcelona, Amsterdam, Madrid, Colonne, Paris, Tokyo, and Belgrade, to name
a few. Among global underground filmmakers one might cite Cataln-Spanish
Antoni Padrs, Dutch Franz Zwartjes, French Pierre Clementi, Japanese
Terayama Shji, or the Paris-based Zanzibar group. To this trend belong as
well the early films of Alejandro Jodorowsky, Pedro Almodovar, or Dusan
Makavejev.

Bibliography and Further References

Hoberman, J. and J. Rosenbaum (1983) Midnight Movies. New York: Harper and
Row, 39-76.

James, D. E. (1985) Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the 1960s.
Princeton: Princeton University Press: 85-165.

Mekas, J. (1972) Movie Journal. The Rise of the New American Cinema, 1959-
1971. New York: Macmillan.

Sitney, P. A. (2002) Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde, 1943-2000.
3rd ed. Oxford University Press.

Surez, J. A. (1996). Bike Boys, Drag Queens, and Superstars: Avant-Garde,
Mass Culture, and Gay Identities in the 1960s Underground Cinema.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press: 52-86.






