
A MOVIE (1958)

Johanna Gosse (Bryn Mawr)

A Movie (1958) is a twelve-minute compilation montage of vintage newsreels,
soft-core girlie movies, low-budget Westerns, educational and
ethnographic films, and other black-and-white 16mm film ephemera. Filmmaker
Bruce Conner selected scenes ranging from the anonymous and slightly
absurdstampeding horses, car crashes, tightrope walkers, half-nude women,
and deep sea diversto more historically specific, even iconic images: the
Hindenburg in flames, Teddy Roosevelt orating, the Tacoma bridge collapse
of 1940, and most strikingly, the 1946 underwater atomic bomb tests at
Bikini Atoll. Using a stopwatch, Conner edited the film to correspond to
its orchestral soundtrack, Ottorino Respighis 1924 Pines of Rome, which
lends dramatic intensity and a dash of kitsch to the dream-like spectacle.
The imagery is punctuated by misplaced credits that repeatedly announce the
films title, maker, and The End at inappropriate moments, as well as by
flickering frames of academy leader and perforated or spoiled film stock,
elements that call attention to both the apparatus and to the formulaic
conventions of narrative cinema. The lasting influence of Conners film is
most apparent in contemporary digital medias recuperation of the radical
recombinatory techniques that he pioneered over a half-century ago.

                                    [pic]

                   Still from Bruce Conner, A MOVIE (1958)


Further Reading

Hatch, Kevin. (2012) Looking for Bruce Conner, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.

Jenkins, Bruce. (1999) Explosion in a Film Factory: The Cinema of Bruce
Conner, 2000 BC: The Bruce Conner Story, Peter Boswell, Bruce Jenkins, and
Joan Rothfuss, eds. Minneapolis, MN: Walker Art Center: 185-223.

MacDonald, Scott. (1988) Bruce Conner, A Critical Cinema: Interviews with
American Independent Filmmakers, Vol. V, Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press: 244256.
Wees, William C. (1993) Recycled Images: The Art and Politics of Found
Footage Films, New York: Anthology Film Archives.


