

Hollywood cartoon studio UPA (United Productions of America) was founded in 1943 by former Disney animators Steven Bosustow, Zachary Schwartz, and David Hilberman. It profoundly influenced animation art and practice around the world with its modern design and adult themes. UPA created highly praised theatrical cartoon shorts, distributed by Columbia Pictures, from 1948 until 1959. During this time it also produced television commercials, the ground-breaking animated television series The Boing-Boing Show (1956-1957), and the feature-length cartoon, 1001 Arabian Nights (1959). Although UPA continued as a business entity into the twenty-first century, its aesthetic significance and influence effectively ended with its theatrical shorts. 



UPA animators, most of them graduates of college art programs, had become frustrated with the stratified studio production system pioneered by Walt Disney and with Disney’s relatively realistic character animation, both of which had been widely imitated. Language of Vision (1944) by Gyorgy Kepes, head of the Light and Colour curriculum at Chicago’s New Bauhaus, significantly influenced UPA animators with its notions of the educational function of visual art and its analysis of design components. 

Hollywood cartoon studio UPA (United Productions of America) was founded in 1943 by former Disney animators Steven Bosustow, Zachary Schwartz, and David Hilberman. It profoundly influenced animation art and practice around the world with its modern design and adult themes. UPA created highly praised theatrical cartoon shorts, distributed by Columbia Pictures, from 1948 until 1959. During this time it also produced television commercials, the ground-breaking animated television series The Boing-Boing Show (1956-1957), and the feature-length cartoon, 1001 Arabian Nights (1959). Although UPA continued as a business entity into the twenty-first century, its aesthetic significance and influence effectively ended with its theatrical shorts. 



UPA animators, most of them graduates of college art programs, had become frustrated with the stratified studio production system pioneered by Walt Disney and with Disney’s relatively realistic character animation, both of which had been widely imitated. Language of Vision (1944) by Gyorgy Kepes, head of the Light and Colour curriculum at Chicago’s New Bauhaus, significantly influenced UPA animators with its notions of the educational function of visual art and its analysis of design components. 



Studio head Bosustow ran UPA democratically, with artists working in different capacities on different films. UPA favored satire over slapstick, human characters over anthropomorphized animals, limited animation, the expressive use of color, and a general avoidance of violence. Character design was not based on rounded shapes and center-line symmetries. Backgrounds were reduced to a few details, characters’ faces might be different colors in different scenes, color often spread beyond outline, and backgrounds might dissolve behind a figure to communicate movement across different scenes. 



House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) investigations put serious pressure on UPA in the early 1950s because of some animators’ earlier Communist connections. Several wrote letters disavowing Communism in order to keep their jobs. For his part, UPA’s creative head, John Hubley, left the company in 1952 rather than compromise his principles. Yet despite the political turbulence, the studio garnered critical success. In 1955, the Museum of Modern Art presented an exhibition of UPA artwork – UPA: Form in the Animated Cartoon. 



UPA’s one popular continuing character, Mr. Magoo, a near-sighted old man living in his own version of reality, came to dominate their production schedule in later years. Gerald McBoing-Boing  (created by Theodore ‘Dr. Seuss’ Geisel), a little boy who spoke sound effects rather than words, appeared in several Jolly Frolics, a series of one-off cartoons, and hosted their television series. 	



UPA had a considerable international influence, as their award-winning shorts and television series inspired other animators. The animators of Yugoslavia’s Zagreb Studio, for example, managed to obtain a print of The Four Poster (1952), a feature film for which UPA had made animated bridges between scenes, and studied it intensively to learn UPA’s methods; they then refined UPA’s ideas and developed them even further through their own internationally honored cartoons. Animators who left UPA began their own independent studios (most notably John Hubley and his Storyboard Films) and maintained the UPA style in their shorts and commercials. In addition, UPA veterans became animation instructors at major film schools and educated generations of young animators in design and experimentation.



Selected Filmography

Hell-Bent for Election (1944) 

A Few Quick Facts about Inflation (1944) 

A Few Quick Facts about Fear (1945) 

Brotherhood of Man (1945)

Flat-Hatting (1946) 

Robin Hoodlum (1948) 

Magic Fluke (1949) 

Ragtime Bear (1949) 

Gerald McBoing-Boing (1950) 

Trouble Indemnity (1950) 

Rooty Toot Toot (1951) 

Madeline (1952) 

Pink and Blue Blues (1952) 

The Unicorn in the Garden (1953) 

Christopher Crumpet (1953) 

The Tell-Tale Heart (1953) 

When Magoo Flew (1954) 

Gerald McBoing-Boing on Planet Moo (1956) 

The Jaywalker (1956) 

Magoo’s Puddle Jumper (1956) 

Trees and Jamaica Daddy (1957) 



Further reading:

 (Abraham, Filmography)

(Abraham, When Magoo Flew: The Rise and Fall of Animation Studio UPA)

(Amidi)

(Barrier)

(Maltin)

(When Magoo Flew)