John Xaviers

						

						Varma, Raja Ravi  (1848-1906)

						

						Raja Ravi Varma transformed the way Indian gods and goddesses were pictured, and he did so with oil painting, a new import in nineteenth-century India. By the last quarter of the 19th century, when western art had long rejected Salon art and a modernist explosion in painterly surface was imminent, the auto-didact Raja Ravi Varma started to paint in an academic realistic style.   This interaction with western oil painting can be regarded as the advent of modernism in Indian art. It may sound paradoxical to consider the adoption of western academic realism as modernist but in this instance, the modernism was a break from various folk or classical Indian painterly traditions. The role of the aristocratic gentleman artist, which Ravi Varma performed, differed from traditional artisans in that it entailed a scientific temperament in art-making, with awareness of anatomy, geometry (perspective), and colour theory. Many scholars have claimed that Raja Ravi Varma forged a “visual unity” in India through his calendar art – chromolithographs created with imported German technology – which circulated throughout India. His work visually unified the Hindu pantheon, which had until then been iconographically as diverse as the number of dynasties that had ruled across ancient India. 

						

						

						References and Further reading

 Chawla, Rupika. Raja Ravi Varma: Painter of Colonial India. Mapin Publishing, 2010.

Guha-Thakurta, Tapati. The Making of a New “Indian” Art: Artists, Aesthetics and Nationalism in Bengal, C.1850-1920. Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Kapur, Geeta. When Was Modernism: Essays on Contemporary Cultural Practice in India. New Delhi: Tulika, 2000.

Mitter, Partha. Art and Nationalism in Colonial India, 1850-1922: Occidental Orientations. Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Nandakumar, R. “The Missing Male: The Female Figures of Ravi Varma and the Concepts of Family, Marriage and Fatherhood in Nineteenth Century Kerala.” South Indian Studies 1, no. January (1996): 54–82.

Neumayer, Erwin, and Christine Schelberger. Raja Ravi Varma Portrait Of An Artist: The Diary Of C. Raja Raja Varma. Oxford University Press India, 2005.