

Virago is a British publishing company founded in 1973 by Carmen Callil, primarily to endorse women’s writing and increase awareness of women’s literary history. Inspired by the women’s movement, the name Virago and the bitten apple logo suggest the power of courageous, outspoken females, and subversive knowledge. Elaine Showalter’s A Literature of Their Own (1977) influenced the Virago Modern Classics series which reissues books by overlooked or underappreciated writers. Launched in 1978, this series became the hallmark of the brand and a key to its success. The imprint includes Dorothy Richardson, Rebecca West, Radclyffe Hall, Vita Sackville-West, H.D., Gertrude Stein, Djuna Barnes and other innovators of modernist literature. Virago’s reprints of women’s fiction have contributed to the scholarly reappraisal of the ‘New Woman’ and other aspects of gendered modernism, demonstrating the press’s impact on literary criticism and modernist studies.

Virago is a British publishing company founded in 1973 by Carmen Callil, primarily to endorse women’s writing and increase awareness of women’s literary history. Inspired by the women’s movement, the name Virago and the bitten apple logo suggest the power of courageous, outspoken females, and subversive knowledge. Elaine Showalter’s A Literature of Their Own (1977) influenced the Virago Modern Classics series which reissues books by overlooked or underappreciated writers. Launched in 1978, this series became the hallmark of the brand and a key to its success. The imprint includes Dorothy Richardson, Rebecca West, Radclyffe Hall, Vita Sackville-West, H.D., Gertrude Stein, Djuna Barnes and other innovators of modernist literature. Virago’s reprints of women’s fiction have contributed to the scholarly reappraisal of the ‘New Woman’ and other aspects of gendered modernism, demonstrating the press’s impact on literary criticism and modernist studies.



File: Virago Press.jpg

Virago Press 1

Source: Early logo for Virago Press. Image can be found at https://kaggsysbookishramblings.wordpress.com/tag/all-virago-all-august/

Further reading:

 (Callil)

(Murray)

(Showalter)

(Virago)