
VKhUTEMAS (Vysshie Khudozhestvenno-Tekhnicheskie MasterskieHigher Art and
Technical Studios) was the school of arts and architecture in Moscow
between 1920 and 1927. Similar art and technical studios existed in other
Soviet cities. VKhUTEMAS was supervised by Narkompros (the ministry of
culture), particularly by the commissar (minister) of culture Anatolii
Lunacharskii and became the center of developing and propagating modernism
in Soviet Russia.

VKhUTEMAS emerged as a result of post-Revolutionary reconstruction of a
preexisting system of art education: it replaced Moscow Svomas (Svobodnye
gosudarstvennye khudozhestvennye masterskieIndependent State Art Studios),
which, in turn, was formed in 1918 on the base of the pre-Revolutionary
Stroganov Art School (First Free Art Studio) and the Moscow School of
Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture (Second Free Art Studio). Likewise,
in 1927 VKhUTEMAS did not disappear, but was restructured and renamed as
VKhUTEIN (Vysshii Khudozhestvenno-Tekhnicheskii InstitutHigher Art and
Technical Institute), which in 1930 was once again reorganized into several
institutions. VKhUTEMAS and VKhUTEIN were headed by painter and sculptor
Efim Ravdel (1920-1923), graphic artist Vladimir Favorskii (1923-1926),
and critic Pavel Novitskii (1926-1930).

The pedagogical system and the modernist experimentation that took place at
VKhUTEMAS made critics compare it with the BAUHAUS, and indeed, the two
schools maintained a connection and exchanged exhibitions and delegations
(in particular, during the directorship of HANNES MEYER at the Bauhaus).
However, towards the late 1920s VKhUTEMAS became significantly larger than
the Bauhaus (for instance, 1445 students studied at VKhUTEMAS in 1923);
unlike the Bauhaus, it prepared not only designers, but also artists,
sculptors, and architects.

VKhUTEMAS consisted of several departments (their number changed from five
to eight), which were subdivided into fine arts (Painting, Sculpture, and
Architecture), and industrial (Textile, Graphics, Metal- and Woodwork,
Ceramics) ones. As formulated in the Soviet government decree that
proclaimed the creation of VKhUTEMAS, the main task of the institution was
preparing specialists for Soviet industry (industrial designers). This
programme of industrial art [proizvodstvennoe iskusstvo] was particularly
favoured and developed by the first rector Ravdel and by Constructivist
artists, who insisted on defying the old separation of art from life. In
reality, however, most VKhUTEMAS students preferred studying fine arts and
low enrollment into industrial departments had always remained a problem
for VKhUTEMAS pedagogues. In spite of their efforts in the field of
industrial design, the most significant achievements of VKhUTEMAS were its
new approaches to form-making, which were connected to preliminary
theoretical courses rather than design workshops.

Similarly to the Bauhaus Vorkurs system, at the beginning of their
education all students at VKhUTEMAS were required to take several
introductory, so-called propaedeutic, courses, which provided them with
formal principles for future work, and which were based on connecting each
art discipline with a formal element dominant for it (the so-called
objective method): Colour (developed by Constructivists LIUBOV POPOVA
and ALEKSANDR VESNIN) served as an introduction to painting, Volume
(developed by Cubist sculptor Boris Korolev)to sculpture, Space
(developed by the Rationalist architect NIKOLAI LADOVSKII)to architecture,
and Drawing (that is, line)as an introduction to graphic design. The
most developed of the introductory courses, Ladovskiis course Space,
analyzed three-dimensional reality as a combination of elements of
sensation: the basic physical, geometrical, and spatial properties of
form, such as mass, volume, gravity, or dynamics.

Whereas, initially, Constructivism flourished within the Painting
Department, already at the end of 1921 the Constructivist pedagogues of
VKhUTEMAS (Rodchencko, Popova, Vesnin and Lavinskii) moved to the positions
of PRODUCTIVISM and concentrated their work in the industrial (design, as
opposed to fine arts) departments, in particular, in Metal- and Woodwork
(the two departments existed separately until 1926, when they were united;
TATLIN taught a course on the Culture of Material, Rodchenkoon the
Design of Metal Equipment and Reinforcement, LISSITZKY, in 1926-1930on
furniture design). As a result of the move of the Constructivists to
industrial departments, painting was left to more conservative artists, and
indeed, already in 1922-1924 the Department of Painting was taken over by
the proponents of easelism. Most of the professors of painting in the mid-
1920s were previously connected to the exhibition society The Knave of
Diamonds, which in 1910-1917 promoted Primitivisim, Cezannism, and Neo-
Impressionism in Russia (Petr Konchalovsky, Aleksandr Kuprin, Ilia
Mashkov, Aleksandr Osmerkin, Robert Falk).

The Department of Architecture, although technically belonging to fine
arts, in reality occupied a middle position between fine and industrial
disciplines. In the early 1920s (at the time when the Constructivists
actively taught at the Department of Painting), the Architecture Department
was dominated by the traditionalists (the first three architectural
workshops were headed by ZHOLTOVSKII, SHCHUSEV, and Ivan Rylskii).
However, by the mid-1920 it replaced Painting as the centre of modernist
experimentation at VKhUTEMAS. In 1920, Ladovskii, Nikolai Dokuchaev, and
Vladimir Krinskii opened the first modernist architectural studios (the so-
called United Left Studios, or Obmas). MELNIKOV and GOLOSOV maintained a
joint studio from the early 1920s, and Aleksandr Vesnin opened his
Constructivist studio in 1924.

During his rectorship in 1923-1926, Favorskiis tried to overcome the split
between fine art and industrial departments. Thus, before enrolling into a
particular department, all students had to  pass through a course of
education at the Basic Department [Osnovnoe otdelenie], which brought
together introductory courses that had previously been taught separately,
providing  formal artistic background for all disciplines.

The dissolution of VKhUTEIN in 1930 was motivated by an urge to tie art and
design education to industry. Thus, the Basic Department was eliminated as
non-practical, whereas other departments were transferred to institutions
that specialized according to types of industrial production, such as the
Moscow Architectural Institute, Moscow Textile Institute, and Moscow
Institute of Graphic Design (all of which continue to exist today), while
the departments of Painting and Sculpture were relocated to Leningrad.



Selected References:

L. I. Ivanova-Veen, O. M. Ziuskevich, T. V. Lysova, Ot VKhUTEMASa K MARKhI,
1920-1936: Arkhitekturnye Proekty Iz Sobraniia Muzeia MARKhI, Moskva: A-
Fond, 2005.

Selim Khan-Magomedov, VHUTEMAS. Edition du Regard, Paris 1990. Vols. 1-2.

Selim Khan-Magomedov, VKhUTEMAS: Vysshie gosudarstvennye khudozhestvennye
masterskie. Arkhitektura. Derevo. Metall. Keramika. Grafika. Zhivopis.
Skulptura. Tekstil. Moskva: Ladia, 1995. Vols, 1-2.

Catherine Cooke, Russian Avant-Garde: Theories of Art, Architecture, and
the City, Academy Editions, 1995.



Visual Material:

[pic]

Arkhitektura VKhUTEMAS [Architecture [at] VKhUTEMAS]. Book cover by El
Lissitzky, 1927.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vkhutemas.jpg

[pic]

Tubular steel chair designed in Tatlin's atelier at Vkhutein, 1927

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vkhutein.jpg

[pic]

V. A. Petrov, Assignment on the Expression of Form. Ladovskii Workshop,
1920. Published in: Arkhitektura VKhUTEMAS. Raboty arkhitekturnogo
fakulteta VKhUTEMASa. Moskva: Izdanie VKhUTEMASa, 1927, 1.

[pic]

Mikhail Kuznetsov, Color space on a plane. Abstract composition, 1921.
Color course of Vesnin and Popova. Published in: L. I. Ivanova-Veen
(ed.),VKhUTEMAS/VKhUTEIN. Uchebnye raboty. 1920-1930. Moskva-Leningrad.
Moskva: Pechatnyi dom, 19.

[pic]

Nadezhda Kolpakova, Model. Entrance examination drawing for the course
Drawing, 1926. Published in: L. I. Ivanova-Veen (ed.),VKhUTEMAS/VKhUTEIN.
Uchebnye raboty. 1920-1930. Moskva-Leningrad. Moskva: Pechatnyi dom, 49.



