

Born in Biebrich, Rhineland (now Hesse, Germany), the German philosopher and psychologist Wilhelm Christian Ludwig Dilthey founded the German school of philosophy called Lebensphilosophie (philosophy of life). He studied theology, history and philosophy in Heidelberg and Berlin and in 1864 he was awarded a doctorate for his dissertation on the ethics of Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768-1834). After holding professorships in Basel, Kiel and Breslau, he became a professor of philosophy at the University of Berlin in 1882. In his Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften (vol. 1, 1883; Introduction to the Human Sciences), he defined the common method of the humanities.

Born in Biebrich, Rhineland (now Hesse, Germany), the German philosopher and psychologist Wilhelm Christian Ludwig Dilthey founded the German school of philosophy called Lebensphilosophie (philosophy of life). He studied theology, history and philosophy in Heidelberg and Berlin and in 1864 he was awarded a doctorate for his dissertation on the ethics of Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768-1834). After holding professorships in Basel, Kiel and Breslau, he became a professor of philosophy at the University of Berlin in 1882. In his Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften (vol. 1, 1883; Introduction to the Human Sciences), he defined the common method of the humanities. Dilthey attempted to establish a theoretical and methodological foundation for the human sciences (Geisteswissenschaften), distinct from, but following the scientific model of the natural sciences (Naturwissenschaften). He argued that in natural sciences we seek to explain phenomena in terms of cause and effect (Erklärung, explanation), whereas in the humanities we seek to understand or interpret (Verstehen, understanding). On the basis of Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics, Dilthey developed his typology of life, in which individual experience is necessarily tied to its social-historical contexts. Dilthey’s hermeneutics had a strong impact on Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg Gadamer and his analyses of the human consciousness influenced Edmund Husserl. He died October 1, 1911, in Seis am Schlern, South Tyrol.

Further reading:

(Dilthey)

(Dilthey, Selected Works)