

Vvedensky, Aleksandr Ivanovich (1904-1941)

ВВЕДЕНСКИЙ, АЛЕКСАНДР ИВАНОВИЧ

Known during his lifetime as a failed avant-garde poet who went on to a successful, if minor, career as a children's writer, Vvedensky is acknowledged today as one of the most important voices of the Leningrad poetic avant-garde in the late 1920s and 1930s. A co-founder of the short-lived but influential Obedinenie real'nogo iskussta  or OBERIU (The Association for Real Art), Vvedensky is one of the creators of Russia's first literature of the Absurd. Starting from the premise that language and logic were unable to convey the truth of reality, Vvedensky rejected the traditional conventions of Russian poetry and sought the key to human cognition in the concept of the absurd [bessmyslitsa].

Known during his lifetime as a failed avant-garde poet who went on to a successful, if minor, career as a children's writer, Vvedensky is acknowledged today as one of the most important voices of the Leningrad poetic avant-garde in the late 1920s and 1930s. A co-founder of the short-lived but influential Obedinenie real'nogo iskussta  or OBERIU (The Association for Real Art), Vvedensky is one of the creators of Russia's first literature of the Absurd. Starting from the premise that language and logic were unable to convey the truth of reality, Vvedensky rejected the traditional conventions of Russian poetry and sought the key to human cognition in the concept of the absurd [bessmyslitsa]. 



Profoundly out of sync with the philosophical values and literary norms of emerging Stalinist culture and hounded by an increasingly hostile critical establishment, Vvedensky was arrested in 1931 and again in 1941, when he died in the custody of the NKVD. After his arrest and death most of his manuscripts were tragically destroyed. He was almost completely forgotten until the 1970s, when the process of returning his legacy to the history of Russian literature began.  

	

Works:

Vse (Everything); Ed. A. Gerasimova. Moscow: OGI (2011)  

Includes all of Vvedensky's surviving works, as well as chronicle of his life and works, and important critical, biographical, and memoiristic works.

Polnoe sobranie sochinenii; Eds. M. Meilakh and V. Erl', Moscow: Gileia (1993)

Polnoe sobranie sochinenii; Ed. M. Meilakh, Ann Arbor: Ardis (1980-84) 

An Invitation for Me to Think; Trs. E. Ostashevsky & M. Yankelevich, NY: NYRB (2013)

OBERIU: An Anthology of Russian Absurdism;  Ed. E. Ostashevsky, Evanston: Northwestern University Press (2006) 

The Grey Notebook;  Trs. M. Yankelevich, New York: Ugly Duckling Press (2002)  

The Man with the Black Coat: Russia's Literature of the Absurd; Trs. G. Gibian, Evanston: Northwestern University Press (1997, originally published 1971) 

Further reading:

(Dmitrenko and al.)



(Ichin. and Kudriavtsev)



(Roberts)



(Stone-Nakhimovsky)



(Valieva)