

Harriet Weaver Shaw was a political activist and magazine editor, best remembered for her literary and financial support of the modernist writer James Joyce. Born into a wealthy family with roots in the cotton industry, Harriet Shaw Weaver turned first to social work. An interest in women’s suffrage led to her involvement with the New Freewoman and, from 1911, she devoted her inherited wealth to sponsoring the arts, gradually becoming a major patron and publisher of modernism. In 1913 she became the business manager of the New Freewoman, taking over from Dora Marsden as editor when it became the Egoist. Her financial support was crucial to the success of this literary periodical, which published almost every significant name in modernism, including T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, James Joyce, Wyndham Lewis and Marianne Moore, but only sold 200 copies between 1916 and 1919.

Harriet Weaver Shaw was a political activist and magazine editor, best remembered for her literary and financial support of the modernist writer James Joyce. Born into a wealthy family with roots in the cotton industry, Harriet Shaw Weaver turned first to social work. An interest in women’s suffrage led to her involvement with the New Freewoman and, from 1911, she devoted her inherited wealth to sponsoring the arts, gradually becoming a major patron and publisher of modernism. In 1913 she became the business manager of the New Freewoman, taking over from Dora Marsden as editor when it became the Egoist. Her financial support was crucial to the success of this literary periodical, which published almost every significant name in modernism, including T.S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, James Joyce, Wyndham Lewis and Marianne Moore, but only sold 200 copies between 1916 and 1919.



In 1916 she established the Egoist Press to publish Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (previously serialised in The Egoist) and went on to publish several other major works, including Eliot’s first collection of poetry, Prufrock and Other Observations (1917). Starting in 1914, Weaver gradually became Joyce’s patron and principle source of income. It has been estimated that she gave him the modern equivalent of 1.5 million euros during his lifetime. Although this patronage was initially anonymous, their subsequent personal correspondence offers many insights into Joyce’s work on Ulysses and Finnegans Wake. Her papers are now held at the British Library, including Joyce’s letters and notes.

Further reading:

 (Lidderdale and Nicholson)

(Brooker and Thacker)