
Wednesday Art Group, 1952-1967

Wednesday Art Group (WAG) was a pioneering art society based in Kuala
Lumpur which grew from regular weekly art classes initiated and conducted
by Peter Harris, then Art Supervisor of the Federation of Malaya. In the
absence of a national art school in Kuala Lumpur, WAG provided creative
individuals and art enthusiasts who had little formal training with fertile
conditions for the appreciation, experimentation and development of
Malayan art. Many WAG members later pursued higher education in the arts
field and became successful Malaysian artists. Officially registered with
the Registrar of Societies in 1956, WAG was initially intended as an
informal art club by Peter Harris for art teachers, students and art
lovers. Described as the founder and guiding light of WAG, Harris presented
a conducive and congenial environment for the learning of basic drawing and
painting techniques and a broad appreciation of all art forms. Open to
anyone regardless of creed, language or age, WAG claimed to maintain an
apolitical but serious approach toward art development, which mostly drew
upon Harris broad pedagogical strengths in creative thinking and the
fundamentals of drawing.
[pic]
Patrick Ng, Spirit of Earth, Water and Air, 1958, Oil, Collection of
National Art Gallery Malaysia [Permissions to be obtained]
http://www.viweb.freehosting.net/PatrickNg.htm
Activities of the Group included outdoor sketching and painting trips to
parts of Malaysia, studio drawing sessions of models or still-life objects
and appreciation of art from a variety of cultures. Though criticised
initially for their immature and technically imperfect artworks, WAGs
reputation grew as a result of greater exhibition opportunities and
increased attention to nationalist cultures leading up to the countrys
independence in 1957. Their first annual exhibition, held at the British
Council Centre in 1956 was well-received and marked the official
declaration of the Groups vision: to foster the development of a new style
in Malayan art. Subsequently, several members of WAG became prominent
Federation painters and exhibited regularly in shows organised by the
Federation of Malaya Arts Council and later the National Art Gallery, Kuala
Lumpur.
WAG was recognised in Malaysian modern art discourses for producing
pioneering Malaysian artists such as Patrick Ng, Cheong Lai Tong, and Syed
Ahmad Jamal. Its influence in developing and fostering a consolidated
aesthetic ideology remained ambivalent. The diverse styles and highly
individualistic expressions of members became the predominant hallmark of
the Group. Most members have since pursued careers in other fields,
including Graphic Design and Architecture. After Harris was posted out of
Kuala Lumpur, Cheong led the Group for a period of time before it
eventually disbanded in 1967, for unknown reasons.
References and further reading
(1957) Wednesday Art Group Exhibition 2. Kuala Lumpur: Wah Kiew Printing
Co. (A catalogue produced in conjunction with the exhibition held at
British Council Centre. It includes a brief introduction and comprehensive
list of works and participating artists).
(1996) The Wednesday Art Group: Then and Now. Kuala Lumpur: Galeriwan.
(Likely the first art exhibition examining the historical context of the
art group with recent and past works of some members. It includes a
comprehensive essay by Yeoh Jin Leng, coloured reproductions of works and
excerpts from early catalogues).
(2001) Peter Harris: Founder of the Wednesday Art Group. Penang: The Art
Gallery. (A monograph for the first retrospective exhibition on Peter
Harris by private gallerist and collector, Tan Chee Khuan. It includes a
concise biographical account of Peter Harris, coloured illustrations and
excerpts from newspapers.)


