
Wilson, Ethel (1888-1980)

Ethel Wilson was a modernist prose writer who lived in Vancouver, Canada.
Wilson began writing late in life; although she was only six years younger
than Virginia Woolf, she published her first book, Hetty Dorval, in 1947,
six years after Woolfs death. Wilson was one of the first Canadian writers
to represent both the growing city of Vancouver  including its Chinese-
Canadian population and the class divisions in Vancouver society  and the
rich landscape of British Columbias Interior. Her published work includes
three novellas, three novels, a collection of short stories, and a
collection of essays, stories, and letters published posthumously. An
orphan herself, Wilson often wrote about women without families who must
negotiate the difficult social world in order to become self-sufficient and
self-fulfilled. For this reason, her works are latently, if not radically,
feminist. Furthermore, she often presents and meditates on difficult moral
questions. Wilson commonly quotes John Donnes phrase No Man is an Island
to emphasize her protagonists obligation to mediate between their desires
and the needs of others. Wilson died on 22 December, 1980 at a private
hospital in Vancouver.

Wilson was born Ethel Davis Bryant to Methodist missionaries in Port
Elizabeth, South Africa. The early years of her life were full of tragedy
and travel. Following the deaths of her mother and brother in 1889, she
left South Africa for England in 1890. After her fathers death in 1897,
she moved to Vancouver, BC to live with her maternal grandmother. Wilson
attended a Methodist school for girls in England (Trinity Hall School in
Southport, Lancashire) starting in 1902, and returned to Vancouver to
become a teacher in 1906. She married Wallace Wilson in 1921, after which
she retired from teaching and devoted most of her time to her duties as the
wife of a prominent doctor. Ethel Wilson came to fiction-writing slowly and
intermittently in the following decades.

Wilsons published works can be broken into two rough periods: moral-
realist and innovative-modernist. However, since she published all of her
books in a relatively short period of time (between 1947 and 1961), these
periods do not indicate as radical a change as they might within a longer
publishing history. Furthermore, while Wilson maintained her interest in
questions of morality throughout her career, her later works focus less on
moral allegory and more on the challenges of living a moral life.

Wilsons first novella, Hetty Dorval (1947), is a moral tale about the fate
of a young and impressionable girl, Frankie Burnaby, at the hands of Hetty
Dorval. Wilson suggests that Hetty, a cosmopolitan and selfish woman, is an
allegorical figure for European decadence before the Second World War. This
novella is the only one of Wilsons works to be narrated in the first
person. After Hetty Dorval, Wilson published The Innocent Traveller (1949),
a long novel about a vivacious but nave woman, based on Wilsons great
aunt, who lived for a century.

Following The Innocent Traveller, Wilson began writing works that can more
easily be categorized as modernist. Wilsons modernism is characterized by
her use of a mulitiplicity of narrative perspectives, her meditations on
faith and the possibility of God in a seemingly dis-enchanted modern world,
and condensed symbolic allusion. The greatest examples of Wilsons
modernism are Lillys Story and Tuesday and Wednesday, published
together in The Equations of Love (1952), and her best-known work, Swamp
Angel (1954). W.J. Keith remarks that [w]ith the publication of The
Equations of Love, Wilson came to full maturity as a technically
resourceful writer of fiction (55). Lillys Story and Swamp Angel are
both stories of a womans desire for autonomy in the modern world. Thus,
they are exemplary of Wilsons subtle yet persistent feminism. Her final
novel, Love and Salt Water (1956), continues Wilsons usual theme of moral
responsibility, but does not demonstrate the same formal innovation as the
two books that preceded it. In her collection of short stories, Mrs
Golightly and Other Stories (1961), Wilson returned to narrative
experimentation and put it to use to represent the shocking and uncanny
character of seemingly banal events.

David Stouck notes in his biography of Wilson that she became Canadas
grand dame of the literary world in the 1960s. In 1961, Wilson won a
Canada Council Medal for her work in the arts. During this period, Wilson
also offered support and encouragement to younger novelists, most notably
Margaret Laurence, with whom she developed a close friendship.

List of Works

Wilson, E. (1947) Hetty Dorval, Toronto: Macmillan. (Hetty Dorval is a
short novella about a young girls moral education in the years leading to
the Second World War.)

Wilson, E. (1949) The Innocent Traveller, Toronto and London: Macmillan.
(The Innocent Traveller follows the life of Topaz Edgeworth, which spans a
century. The book is a fictional tribute to the memory of Wilsons great
aunt, Eliza Edge.)

Wilson, E. (1952) The Equations of Love, Toronto and London: Macmillan.
(The Equations of Love contains two novellas: Lillys Story and Tuesday
and Wednesday. These novellas are examples of Wilsons modernism and
strongly thematize class differences and moral action.)

Wilson, E. (1954) Swamp Angel, Toronto and London: Macmillan. (Swamp Angel
is Wilsons best-known novel. It thematizes the landscape of interior
British Columbia, the agency of women, and the redemptive power of love and
compassion.)

Wilson, E. (1956) Love and Salt Water, Toronto and London: Macmillan.
(Wilsons final novel, Love and Salt Water features a meditation on the
unrelenting power of accidents to undo a persons best intentions.)

Wilson, E. (1961) Mrs Golightly and Other Stories, Toronto: Macmillan.
(Wilsons collection of short stories contains stories on themes that
appear in her longer works, such as descriptions of the landscape of
British Columbia and class boundaries. The collection is notable, however,
for its darker, almost surreal stories, such as I just love dogs and Mr.
Sleepwalker.)

Wilson, E. (1987) Ethel Wilson: Stories, Essays, and Letters, David Stouck
(ed.), Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. (This book is a
collection of Wilsons essays and previously unpublished correspondence and
stories. David Stouck has carefully edited the collection and it is an
essential resource for Wilsons thoughts on literature and her discussions
with her editor at Macmillan, John Gray.)

References and Further Reading

Biographies

McAlpine, M. (1988) The Other Side of Silence: Ethel Wilson As I Knew Her,
Madeira Park, British Columbia, Harbour Publishing. (Written by a long-time
friend of Wilsons, this biography is less rigorous than Stoucks and often
relies on personal memories over archival research.)

Stouck, D. (2003) Ethel Wilson: A Critical Biography, Toronto: University
of Toronto Press. (Stoucks biography gives the most comprehensive account
of Wilsons life. Stouck usefully incorporates Wilsons biography with
critical readings of her creative work and provides an extensive
bibliography of Wilsons published and unpublished work along with
criticism on Wilson.)


Criticism on Wilson

Only few critical works on Wilsons writing exist. Below are the most
comprehensive and relevant studies of her work.

Bowering, G. (1990) Afterword, Swamp Angel, Toronto: McClelland and
Stewart, 210-16. (Bowerings reading of Wilsons novel focuses on the
British Columbian landscape and the intersection of faith and coincidence.)

Geng, L. (2002) The Rival Editions of Ethel Wilsons Swamp Angel, Essays
on Canadian Writing 77 (2002): 63-89. (Geng traces the changes Wilson made
to Swamp Angel and compares the differences in the Canadian and American
publications of the text.)

Keith, W.J. (1989) Ethel Wilson, A Sense of Style: Studies in the Art of
Fiction in English-Speaking Canada, Toronto: ECW Press: 40-60. (Keith gives
a formal reading of Wilsons works with reference to her omniscient
narration, style indirect libre, and first-person perspective.)

McMullen, L. (ed.) (1982), The Ethel Wilson Symposium, Ottawa: University
of Ottawa Press. (This book contains the proceedings from a symposium on
Wilson that took place shortly after her death. It contains many accessible
essays on a range of topics, including biographical readings of Wilsons
work, a summary of her archives, and thematic, religious, and feminist
readings of her fiction.)

Moss, J. (1974) Patterns of Isolation in English-Canadian Fiction, Toronto:
McClelland and Stewart. (Moss concentrates on isolation as a theme in Swamp
Angel. His chapter on the novel also contains a reading of the Swamp Angel
as a symbol.)

Murray, H. (1985) Metaphor and Metonymy, Language and Landscape in Ethel
Wilsons Swamp Angel, World Literature Written in English 25.1: 241-52.
(Concentrating on the elements of realism, poetry, and philosophical
comment in Swamp Angel, Murrays article gives a formal reading of Wilsons
novel. This article uses a number of formal terms and will be most useful
to the reader who is already familiar with literary devices and formal
genres.)

Pacey, D. (1967) Ethel Wilson, New York: Twayne. (Paceys book was the
first book-length study of Wilsons career. It remains one of the best
resources on Wilsons oeuvre, as it carefully details the themes, images,
allusions, and influences in Wilsons work. In most cases, Paceys readings
of Wilsons books remain the critical standard. Paceys study is
comprehensive but clearly written and well-organized; it therefore makes
for an accessible resource on Wilsons work.)

Smyth, D. (1982), Maggies Lake: The Vision of Female Power in Swamp
Angel The Canadian Novel: Modern Times, John Moss (ed.), Toronto: NC
Press: 159-65. (Smyth gives a feminist reading of Wilsons novel that is
accessible to readers with minimal knowledge of either literary or feminist
theory.)

