

Leonard Woolf was an essayist, author, political activist and publisher. He joined the Civil Service in 1904 and spent seven years in Ceylon, which experience deeply influenced not only his political views, but also his fictional writing. With his wife, the novelist Virginia Woolf, he ran the Hogarth Press, a vanguard publishing house of the period. The Press’s first publication, entitled Two Stories, comprised his ‘Three Jews’ and Virginia Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’. He was a committed socialist and member of the Fabian Society and Labour Party; he served as honorary secretary for the Labour Party’s advisory committees on international and imperial affairs, and stood (unsuccessfully) as a Member of Parliament for the Combined Universities in 1922. An expert on international affairs, he wrote numerous volumes of political analysis. He was a founding member of the League of Nations Society; the two reports included in his book International Government were key documents in the formation of the League itself. He was also joint or literary editor of a number of political periodicals including the International Review, The Political Quarterly, and the Nation (later The New Statesman). He wrote five volumes of autobiography, the last published in the year of his death.

File: Leonard Woolf.jpg

Leonard Woolf 1

Source: Black and white headshot of Leonard Woolf, 1939. Author provided http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/TUwoolf.htm; however, that link appears to be broken. Another link to the same image can be found at http://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonard-Woolf



Leonard Woolf was an essayist, author, political activist and publisher. He joined the Civil Service in 1904 and spent seven years in Ceylon, which experience deeply influenced not only his political views, but also his fictional writing. With his wife, the novelist Virginia Woolf, he ran the Hogarth Press, a vanguard publishing house of the period. The Press’s first publication, entitled Two Stories, comprised his ‘Three Jews’ and Virginia Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’. He was a committed socialist and member of the Fabian Society and Labour Party; he served as honorary secretary for the Labour Party’s advisory committees on international and imperial affairs, and stood (unsuccessfully) as a Member of Parliament for the Combined Universities in 1922. An expert on international affairs, he wrote numerous volumes of political analysis. He was a founding member of the League of Nations Society; the two reports included in his book International Government were key documents in the formation of the League itself. He was also joint or literary editor of a number of political periodicals including the International Review, The Political Quarterly, and the Nation (later The New Statesman). He wrote five volumes of autobiography, the last published in the year of his death.



File: bronze bust of Leonard Woolf, Sussex.jpg

bronze bust of Leonard Woolf, Sussex 1

Source: The bronze bust of Leonard Woolf marking where his ashes are buried in the garden of Monk’s House, the Woolfs’ Sussex home, 2005; photo is licenced for use under the Creative Commons. Image can be found at https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Virginia_Woolf_(3)-3.jpg



Selected List of Works

The Village in the Jungle (1913)

The Wise Virgins (1914)

International Government (1916)

Co-operation and the Future of the Industry (1918)

Economic Imperialism (1920)

After the Deluge: A Study of Communal Psychology (1931)

The Intelligent Man's Way to Prevent War (1933)

Quack, Quack!: Essays on Unreason and Superstition in Politics, Belief and Thought (1935)

After the Deluge, Vol. 2 (1939)

Barbarians at the Gate (1939)

The War for Peace (1940)

Principia Politica: A Study of Communal Psychology (1953)

A Calendar of Consolation: A Comforting Thought for Every Day in the Year (1967)

Further reading:

 (Funke)

(Glendinning)

(Meyerowitz)

(Wilson and Eisenberg)

(P. Wilson)