
Workers Theatre Movement



The Workers Theatre Movement (WTM) was an international project, largely
promoted by the Workers International Relief, to conjoin left militant
radical theatres during the period of Stalins Third Period militant
class struggle; it was also briefly the name of a workers troupe in
London. The historical shape of the WTM follows the ideological progress of
the Communist International (Comintern), from the hard left turn in 1929 to
the collaborative politics of the Popular Front in 1933-34. As proposed by
its ideological leaders and principal activists, the Workers Theatre
Movement was evidence of the transnational emergence of a proletarian
culture derived from the universal modernity of industrialism. In practice,
the movement was an aggregate of practices and theories drawn into the
semblance of an organization through the cultural apparatus of the
Comintern.



The Workers Theatre Movement was both a loose international alliance and a
range of local experiences that varied greatly. In metropolitan centres,
the workers troupes occupied a gradient ranging from militant street
theatres, such as Ewan MacColls Red Megaphone in Birmingham, U.K. and the
Shock Troupe of the Workers Laboratory Theatre in New York, to the radical
edges of the professional theatre, such as the Group Theatre in New York
and Unity Theatre in London. Outside of major theatrical centres, WTM
troupes were more often organized by radical unions, or, as in the case of
the Toronto Workers Experimental Theatre, by Communist Party cultural
clubs.



In its Third Period phase, the workers theatre movement was marked by a
struggle expressed in aesthetic debates that were codified in binary
oppositions that reflected international factional struggles in the
Comintern. In the recurring debates over form which fill the pages of
Workers Theatre (renamed New Theatre in 1934), the major question was
whether the aesthetics of workers theatre were most properly expressed by
street and workplace performance (the mobile stage) or traditional
playhouse (stationary) performance; the issue at stake was whether the
playhouse stage was an inherently bourgeois institution.



The international retreat from the politically combative agitprop theatre
of the WTM, indicative of the pressures leading up to the Popular Front,
was announced in December, 1932, at the Second Plenary of the International
Union of Revolutionary Theatres in Moscow, which set out tasks to correct
mistakes and failures. The statement focused on the militant sectarianism
that agitprop enacted. The statement criticized the serious
underestimation of the bourgeois theatre and concluded that the vigour
and militancy of the agitprop troupes had caused the mistaken view to
arise, that such troupes were the only form a revolutionary theater could
take. This was left sectarianism which despised other theatrical forms
(Jones, 132-133).



Although workers troupes typically performed agitprops, various
organizational structures, including Workers Theatre, sought to establish
and circulate a canon of exemplary texts. Of these, the Workers Laboratory
Theatres 1933 play Newsboy (1933) was particularly instrumental in
advancing the proposal that the proletarian aesthetics of workers theatre,
fusing agitprop, choreography, and scenography, was a modernist art that
derived its principles from industrialism. At the same time, non-canonical
popular culture forms flourished, including Red Vaudeville and workers
puppet troupes.



By 1935, the WTM had effectively phased out, subsumed in the United States
by the Federal Theatre Project and in the UK, Australia, and Canada by
Popular Front professionalism that advocated realism, national cultural
traditions, and artistry. Many of the Popular Front troupes announced their
reformation with productions of Clifford Odetss Waiting for Lefty (1935),
which provided a theatrical bridge from agitprop to realism. The most
celebrated of the Popular Front companies was Joan Littlewoods Theatre
Workshop, which was descended from Red Megaphone and had a transformative
impact on British theatre after the Second World War.



List of Works



The following collections include workers theatre scripts:



Endres, Robin and Richard Wright. (eds.) (1976) Eight Men Speak and Other
Plays from the Canadian Workers Theatre, Toronto: New Hogtown.


Papa, Lee. (2009) StagedAction: Six Plays from the American Workers'
Theater, Ithaca: ILR Press/Cornell University Press.




Samuel, Raphael, Ewan MacColl, and Stuart Cosgrove. (eds.) (1985) Theatres
of the Left: 1888-1935; Workers Theatre Movements in Britain and America,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.



References and Further Readings



Cosgrove, Stuart. (1985) From Shock Troupe to Group Theatre, Theatres of
the Left: 1888-1935; Workers Theatre Movements in Britain and America, ed.
Raphael Samuel, Ewan MacColl, and Stuart Cosgrove, London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul: 259-279.



Filewod, Alan. (1999)  A Qualified Workers Theatre Art: Waiting for
Lefty and the (Re)Formation of Popular Front Theatres, Essays in Theatre
17(2) (May): 111-28.



Jones, Leonard. (1964) The British Workers Theatre, 1917-1935, PhD diss.,
Karl-Marx Universitat, Liepzig.



Levine, Ira A. (1985) Left-Wing Dramatic Theory in the American Theatre,
Ann Arbor: UMI.



Novikov, Gregory. (1985) Newsboy, Theatres of the Left: 1888-1935; Workers
Theatre Movements in Britain and America, ed. Raphael Samuel, Ewan MacColl,
and Stuart Cosgrove, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 316-22.



Saxe, Alfred. (1985)  Newsboy: From Script to Performance, Theatres of
the Left: 1888-1935; Workers Theatre Movements in Britain and America, ed.
Raphael Samuel, Ewan MacColl, and Stuart Cosgrove, London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 259-279.



Stourac, Richard, and Kathleen McCreery. (1886) Theatre as a Weapon:
Worker's Theatre in the Soviet Union, Germany and Britain, 1917-1934,
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.



Alan Filewod, University of Guelph





Recommended Illustrations



[pic]



The Red Players, a British workers theatre troupe.

[Source: Working Class Movement Library, available online at:

http://www.wcml.org.uk/contents/international/india/meerut--the-workers-
theatre-movement-play/ ]











[pic]

A Workers Theatre (Toronto) poster, 1932.

[Source: L.W. Conolly Theatre Archives, McLaughlin Library, University of
Guelph





[pic]

Members of the Toronto Workers Theatre, 1932.

[Source: L.W. Conolly Theatre Archives, McLaughlin Library, University of
Guelph.]



[pic]



The cover of the first issue of Workers Theatre, published by the United
Workers Theatres of New York, 1932.

[Source: L.W. Conolly Theatre Archives, McLaughlin Library, University of
Guelph.]









