

Young Vietnamese Artists Association (Hội Họa Sĩ Trẻ Việt Nam)

Society of Saigonese Young Artists

The Young Vietnamese Artists Association (YVAA; 1966-1975) was an avant-garde artist collective founded in Saigon in November 1966 in the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam; 1954-1975).  Also referred to as the Society of Saigonese Young Artists, the majority of its members were under the age of thirty and were recent graduates of the National College of Fine Arts, Saigon (est. 1954) and the Fine Arts College of Hue (est. 1957). The YVAA’s mission was to foster a new direction for visual art in Vietnam that would better reflect the cultural internationalism and modernisation of the era. While YVAA artists experimented with a variety of artistic styles, abstract works influenced by the modernist styles found in the School of Paris — including Lyrical Abstraction, Cubism, Fauvism and Naïve Art — were prevalent. 



Initiated by art collector Dr. Nguyễn Tấn Hồng and artist Ngy Cao Uyên (YVAA’s founding president), the association’s founding members were mainly painters and sculptors: Vị Ý, Cù Nguyễn, Âu Như Thụy, Nguyễn Trung, Trịnh Cung, Nguyên Khai, Hiếu Đệ, Nguyễn Phước, Mai Chửng, Đinh Cường, Nghiêu Đề, Nguyễn Lâm, Hồ Hữu Thủ, and Hồ Thành Đức. With frequent sponsorships from the Goethe Institut and the Alliance Française, the YVAA became a driving force behind Saigon’s arts scene.

The Young Vietnamese Artists Association (YVAA; 1966-1975) was an avant-garde artist collective founded in Saigon in November 1966 in the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam; 1954-1975).  Also referred to as the Society of Saigonese Young Artists, the majority of its members were under the age of thirty and were recent graduates of the National College of Fine Arts, Saigon (est. 1954) and the Fine Arts College of Hue (est. 1957). The YVAA’s mission was to foster a new direction for visual art in Vietnam that would better reflect the cultural internationalism and modernisation of the era. While YVAA artists experimented with a variety of artistic styles, abstract works influenced by the modernist styles found in the School of Paris — including Lyrical Abstraction, Cubism, Fauvism and Naïve Art — were prevalent. 



Initiated by art collector Dr. Nguyễn Tấn Hồng and artist Ngy Cao Uyên (YVAA’s founding president), the association’s founding members were mainly painters and sculptors: Vị Ý, Cù Nguyễn, Âu Như Thụy, Nguyễn Trung, Trịnh Cung, Nguyên Khai, Hiếu Đệ, Nguyễn Phước, Mai Chửng, Đinh Cường, Nghiêu Đề, Nguyễn Lâm, Hồ Hữu Thủ, and Hồ Thành Đức. With frequent sponsorships from the Goethe Institut and the Alliance Française, the YVAA became a driving force behind Saigon’s arts scene. Many of the association’s artists had already received critical acclaim and prestigious awards at the Annual Spring Painting exhibition (Hội Họa Mùa Xuân; 1959-1964) and the First International Exhibition of Fine Arts of Saigon in 1962. Subsequent members included: Đỗ Quang Em, Dương Văn Hùng, Hoàng Ngọc Biên, Lê Tài Điển, Nguyễn Đồng, and Rừng. Without a fine arts museum in South Vietnam, the YVAA established their headquarters as a gallery space on the University of Saigon’s College of Arts campus. 



The YVAA’s modernist goals were a departure from the conservative curriculum of the art academies in Vietnam that were modelled after the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Published in 1966 (revised 1973) for their inaugural exhibition, the YVAA’s manifesto called for a progressive visual arts movement that could retain a uniquely Vietnamese element between Eastern and Western influences. The YVAA promoted artwork that was more relevant to a contemporary Vietnamese public and could garner international scholarly interest. The Association officially disbanded in 1975, when most of its members joined the post-Vietnam War (1954-1975) exodus to resettle abroad. Since then, former members have occasionally exhibited together; the first major reunion was held at the Fine Arts Museum of Ho Chi Minh City in 1994, and the most recent exhibition at the Viet Art Gallery in Houston, Texas, in 2012.



																Image: TrinhCung_TheArrest_1974.jpg

																Image taken from Corinne de Menonville's book, Vietnamese Painting: from Tradition to Modernity (2003), p. 217, image no.2. However, the artist himself has allowed me to use a photo I took of the original work during my studio visit with him since it has remained in his private collection.

Further reading:



 (Huynh)



(Huỳnh)



(Cung, Mỹ Thuật Việt Nam: Những Vấn Đề Xoay Quanh (Vietnamese Art: Some Points for Consideration))



 (Cung)