

Yu, Hyun-mok

Yu, Hyŏn-mok

Yu Hyun-mok belonged to the first generation of post-liberation filmmakers in South Korea, and is known for films inspired by Italian neorealism that unsparingly depicted postwar social problems. His 1961 film Obalt’an (Aimless Bullet) is regarded as one of the great Korean films of the era. The film was made during a brief relaxation of censorship following the April Revolution and the resignation of president Syngman Rhee in 1960. Allegorizing Korean society, it portrays a frustrated patriarch whose meagre salary cannot support his dysfunctional family. It famously makes the protagonist’s decaying tooth a metaphor for festering social ills.

Yu Hyun-mok belonged to the first generation of post-liberation filmmakers in South Korea, and is known for films inspired by Italian neorealism that unsparingly depicted postwar social problems. His 1961 film Obalt’an (Aimless Bullet) is regarded as one of the great Korean films of the era. The film was made during a brief relaxation of censorship following the April Revolution and the resignation of president Syngman Rhee in 1960. Allegorizing Korean society, it portrays a frustrated patriarch whose meagre salary cannot support his dysfunctional family. It famously makes the protagonist’s decaying tooth a metaphor for festering social ills. After Park Chung-hee seized power in 1961, Aimless Bullet was suppressed. The regime instituted a film policy aimed at controlling film as propaganda in the service of its economic growth and national security agendas. When Yu later publicly objected to political censorship under an anti-communism law, obscenity charges were brought against his 1965 film Ch’unmong (Empty Dream), a remake of a controversial Japanese film from 1964. In 1968, Yu remade Na Woon-gyu’s legendary anti-colonialist allegory Arirang. Many of his films realistically portray social upheavals caused by industrialization and urbanization. Yu was also a professor at Dongguk University, where he taught a new generation of filmmakers.



Selected Works

Aimless Bullet (Obalt’an, 1961)

The Empty Dream (Ch’unmong, 1965)

The Guests of the Last Train (Makch'a ro on sonnimdŭl, 1967)

Arirang (1968)

School Excursion (Suhak yŏhaeng, 1969)

Further reading:

(Cho)

(Kim)

(KoreanFilm)

(H. Lee)

(Lee and Lee)