
ZAMYATIN, Evgeny (, ) (1884-1937)

Russian author most famous for his dystopic novel We [My], said to have
influenced George Orwells 1984. Criminalised in the pre-Revolutionary
period by the tsarist regime for his revolutionary tendencies and denounced
post-Revolution as a traitor to the ideals of Russian Communism, Zamyatin
was highly influential as an author, journal editor, leader of literary
organisations, and as an instructor and researcher in naval engineering. In
1931, with Stalins permission, Zamyatin moved to France, where he died of
a heart attack in 1937. His contributions to Russian and Soviet literature
were newly acknowledged in the 1980s when his reputation as a traitor was
renounced.

Portrait of E.I. Zamyatin, Boris Kustodiev (1923)


Evgeny Zamyatin was born in the Russian countryside to a middle-class
family and attended St. Petersburg Polytechnic Institute as a student of
naval engineering. Travel for this work combined with the revolutionary
climate of St. Petersburg significantly influenced Zamyatins writing.
Frequent participation in St. Petersburgs revolutionary activity leading
to the 1905 revolution resulted in Zamyatins arrest and exile, which also
served as themes in his literary works. Although officially Zamyatin had
been expelled from St. Petersburg, he remained there as a resident from
1906 until 1911 teaching in the naval engineering program of St. Petersburg
Polytechnic Institute. He was ejected from St. Petersburg by authorities in
1911. While exiled outside of the city, Zamyatin wrote A Provincial Tale
[Uezdnoe], which was well received by critics. Permitted to return to St.
Petersburg in 1913, Zamyatin continued his work at the Polytechnic
Institute, engaging with the literary community, publishing his own stories
and novels, and also producing Russian translations of English works,
including those of H.G. Wells, George Bernard Shaw, and Jack London. He
also edited for prominent journals and provided leadership in literary
organizations, significantly impacting young authors, including an
important group of emerging young authors known as the Serapion
Brotherhood, an organization formed in 1921, devoted to communion among
authors and dedication to craft rather than ideological content.

In the post-Revolutionary period, Zamyatin was considered to be a Fellow
Traveler, the term used to refer to writers who were mostly in agreement
with the goals of the revolution, but who did not always subscribe to the
objectives of Communism. Under Lenin and Trotskys leadership, the Fellow
Travelers were safe. Indeed, during this period in 1920-21, Zamyatin wrote
his most well known works, the novel We, and the short stories Cave
[Peshchera] and Mamai [Mamai]. We is an anti-utopian novel that describes
life in a post-apocalyptic, futuristic, collective society in which humans
have numbers instead of names, love and imagination are criminalised, and
daily life in the nation of One State is meticulously scheduled and highly
restrictive. Citizens live unquestioningly devoted to the leader, the
nation, and a perceived sense of safety from the rest of the world.
Influences for this novel may include Zamyatins acquaintance with H.G.
Wells, or as Elizabeth Stenbock-Fermor has asserted, Jerome K. Jeromes
The New Utopia.

An outspoken opponent to the party line after Lenins death in 1924 and
Stalins consolidation of power in 1928, Zamyatin was denounced as a
traitor and stripped of his authority in literary organizations in 1929.
For two years he endured relentless criticism and isolation in the Soviet
Union, finally appealing personally to Stalin in 1931 for permission to
leave Russia. In 1931, his request was granted and he lived the rest of his
life in France. In the 1980s, We and other works by Zamyatin were
officially published in the USSR, and his reputation as an important
literary figure was reinstated.

References and Further Reading
Brown, Edward J. Brave New World, 1984, and We. Ann Arbor: Ardis, 1976.
Focuses on Zamyatins text with consideration of Huxley and Orwell.

-------. Russian Literature Since the Revolution. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1963. Addresses many other authors, but discusses
Zamyatin in the context of the Serapion Brotherhood, the Fellow Travelers,
and the post-Revolutionary period.

Richards, David J. Zamyatin: A Soviet Heretic. New York: Hillary House,
1962.
Contains an extensive biography and significant descriptions and analysis
of Zamyatins works.

Russell, Robert. Zamyatins We. London: Bristol, 2000.
An update of older sources with new perspectives on We. Excellent
bibliography.

Shane, Alex M. Zamyatin. In Handbook of Russian Literature. Ed. Victor
Terras. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985. Provides an outstanding
overview of Zamyatins life and works with cross-references within the
Handbook.

Websites
Yevgeny Zamyatin <http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/zamyatin.htm> General
overview with emphasis on We, and includes a list of works in English and
in Russian, both by and about Zamyatin.

Zamyatin, E.I. <http://www.sovlit.net/bios/zamyatin.html>

Zamyatin in Newcastle <http://www.sclews.me.uk/zamyatin.html> Provides a
detailed look at Zamyatins life in England as a naval engineer.

Works in English
Cave. In The Portable Nineteenth Century Russian Reader. Ed. George
Gibian. New York: Penguin, 1993.

Mamai. In The Literary Encyclopedia.
http://www.litencyc.com/php/anthology.php?UID=170

We. Modern Library Edition. New York: Random House, 2006.

Rachel Stauffer, University of Virginia

Source URLs for images
Portrait of E.I. Zamyatin, Boris Kustodiev (1923)
<http://az.lib.ru/img/z/zamjatin_e_i/text_0188/index.shtml>






