

Arnold Zweig was born on November 10, 1887 to a Jewish family in Glogau, Silesia (now Glogów, Poland). As an anti-war and anti-fascist activist as well as an author who mostly wrote in the German language, Zweig’s work is often classified as ‘Exilliteratur’, a category used to describe works written by people of Jewish origin or with communist sympathies, and which exhibit an anti-Nazi attitude. Zweig is best known for his six-part cycle on World War I, Der große Krieg der weißen Männer (1927-1957). Traditionally realist, Zweig’s novels explore the topics of humanity, war, and justice, and investigate the human predisposition for evil.

Arnold Zweig was born on November 10, 1887 to a Jewish family in Glogau, Silesia (now Glogów, Poland). As an anti-war and anti-fascist activist as well as an author who mostly wrote in the German language, Zweig’s work is often classified as ‘Exilliteratur’, a category used to describe works written by people of Jewish origin or with communist sympathies, and which exhibit an anti-Nazi attitude. Zweig is best known for his six-part cycle on World War I, Der große Krieg der weißen Männer (1927-1957). Traditionally realist, Zweig’s novels explore the topics of humanity, war, and justice, and investigate the human predisposition for evil.



At the outbreak of WWI, Zweig volunteered as a private for the German army. He was stationed at the Western Front and saw action in France, Hungary, and Serbia. Zweig participated in the famous Battle of Verdun. Towards the end of the war, he was assigned at the German Army Headquarters’ press department on the Eastern Front. On the outskirts of the Lithuanian city of Kovno (now Kaunas), Zweig was first introduced to the Eastern European Jewish organizations, and that enabled him to observe the difficult situation of the Ostjuden, Eastern European Jews who were considered ‘unenlightened’, ‘un-German’, and ‘economically depressed’ due to their orthodoxy. Together with the German Jewish artist Hermann Struck, Zweig published Das ostjüdische Antlitz (The Face of East European Jewry) in 1920 in the attempt to gain sympathy among German-speaking Jews for the plight of their Eastern European brethren. After WWI, Zweig travelled to Berlin and served as the editor of the newspaper Jüdische RundschauII.



Zweig admired and was influenced by the psychoanalytic theories of Sigmund Freud, so much so that Zweig’s interest in the psychology of the individual continued to govern most of his work. In 1924, Zweig himself underwent Freudian therapy. Although Zweig is not related to his Austrian contemporary Stefan Zweig, both men are linked to their acquaintance with Freud, of whom the former wrote an unpublished biography and the latter a biographical sketch. From 1927 to 1939—momentous years in Germany’s history—Zweig and Freud exchanged correspondence. Their letters were deemed interesting and extensive enough that they were published in book form in 1968, although twenty-five of those letters were withheld by Freud’s son Ernst and Zweig’s son Adam because they were deemed as ‘too personal’ and ‘of insufficient scientific value’.



The publication of his anti-war novel Der Streit um den Sergeanten Grischa (The Case of Sergeant Grischa) in 1927 propelled Zweig into the international literary scene. In 1929, he became a contributing journalist for the anti-Nazi newspaper Die Weltbühne (World Stage). The same year, Zweig attended one of Hitler’s speeches and later witnessed the burning of his books by the Nazis. When the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933, Zweig emigrated to Palestine where he became close to a group of German-speaking immigrants who viewed themselves as exiles from Europe; this group included Max Brod, Else Lasker-Schüler, and Wolfgang Hildesheimer.



Zweig returned to East Germany in 1948 and became involved with the communist system. He served as president of the German Academy of the Arts from 1950 to 1953, and won the Lenin Peace Prize in 1959. He died in East Berlin on November 26, 1968.



File: Zweig.jpg

Figure 1. Arnold Zweig

Source: http://www.gustav-mahler.eu/index.php/personen-2/756-zweig-arnold-1887-1968





Selected Bibliography

1912 - Novellen um Claudia

1914 - Ritualmord in Ungarn [Ritual Murder in Hungary]

1920 - Das ostjüdische Antlitz [The Face of East European Jewry]

1927 - Der große Krieg der weißen Männer [The Great War of the White Men] - a cycle in six parts

Der Streit um den Sergeanten Grischa [The Case of Sergeant Grischa] (1927)

Junge Frau von 1914 [Young Woman of 1914] (1931)

Erziehung vor Verdun [Education before Verdun] (1935)

Einsetzung eines Königs [Crowning of a King] (1937)

Die Feuerpause (1954)

Die Zeit ist reif [The Time is Ripe] (1957)

1932 - De Vriendt kehrt heim [De Vriendt Goes Home]

1935 - Playthings of Time

1939 - Spinoza [The Living thoughts of Spinoza]

1947 - Das Beil von Wandsbek [The Axe of Wandsbek]

1962 - Traum ist Teuer [A Costly Dream]

Further reading:

(Freud and Zweig)

(Isenberg)

(Murdoch)

(Rost)

(Salamon)

(Steffin)

(White)