

Stefan Zweig was a prominent Austrian-Jewish novelist, playwright and journalist throughout the 1920s and 1930s. Growing up in a Viennese upper-class environment of assimilated Jewry, which attached great importance to the Bildung genre, Zweig devoted himself to literature from a young age. As a student of literature and philosophy at the universities of Vienna and Berlin, he moved in bohemian circles, focusing on his writing. At the age of 19, he published Silberne Saiten [Silver Strings] (1901), a selection of poems initiating his literary success. Theodor Herzl, founder of Zionism and then literary editor of the Viennese newspaper Neue freie Presse, published some of Zweig’s early essays. 



A defender of humanism and internationalism, Zweig himself was not attracted to the Jewish nationalist cause. Zweig did not, however, renounce his roots, and he would occasionally incorporate Jewish themes into stories such as Im Schnee [In the Snow] (1901). Zweig has been recognized, in particular, for his novellas. His most notable novellas include Schachnovelle [The Royal Game] (1942) and Der Amokläufer [Amok] (1922); historical miniatures such as Sternstunden der Menschheit [Decisive Moments in History] (1927); and novelistic biographies of figures like Erasmus, Magellan, Joseph Fouché, Marie Antoinette, and Napoleon. Zweig’s works are characterized by a careful construction of psychological veracity, illustrating the often tragic evolution of powerful emotions into an overall sense of resignation.

Stefan Zweig was a prominent Austrian-Jewish novelist, playwright and journalist throughout the 1920s and 1930s. Growing up in a Viennese upper-class environment of assimilated Jewry, which attached great importance to the Bildung genre, Zweig devoted himself to literature from a young age. As a student of literature and philosophy at the universities of Vienna and Berlin, he moved in bohemian circles, focusing on his writing. At the age of 19, he published Silberne Saiten [Silver Strings] (1901), a selection of poems, which initiated his literary success. Theodor Herzl, founder of Zionism and then literary editor of the Viennese newspaper Neue freie Presse, published some of Zweig’s early essays. 



File: StefanZweig_portrait.jpg

Figure 1 Stefan Zweig (1881-1942) 

Source: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4e/Stefan_Zweig2.png

	

A defender of humanism and internationalism, Zweig himself was not attracted to the Jewish nationalist cause. Zweig did not, however, renounce his roots, and he would occasionally incorporate Jewish themes into stories such as Im Schnee [In the Snow] (1901). Zweig has been recognized, in particular, for his novellas. His most notable novellas include Schachnovelle [The Royal Game] (1942) and Der Amokläufer [Amok] (1922); historical miniatures such as Sternstunden der Menschheit [Decisive Moments in History] (1927); and novelistic biographies of figures like Erasmus, Magellan, Joseph Fouché, Marie Antoinette, and Napoleon. Zweig’s works are characterised by a careful construction of psychological veracity, illustrating the often tragic evolution of powerful emotions into an overall sense of resignation. Zweig was a pacifist, but refrained from taking a political stance in public on the events in Europe leading up to the Second World War — a reluctance heavily criticised by fellow authors. Upon the National Socialists’ blacklisting of his publications in 1933, Zweig left Salzburg for London, and later Petropolis, Brazil. In exile he wrote his only completed novel Ungeduld des Herzens [Beware of Pity] (1939). In his autobiography Die Welt von Gestern [The World of Yesterday] (1942), published posthumously, his nostalgic view of pre-war Austria hints at Zweig’s struggles with alienation while in exile. This struggle proved too much for Zweig — his farewell letter cites an insurmountable sense of intellectual and cultural alienation as contributing factors to his suicide in 1942. 

Further reading:

 (Prater)



 (Allday)

 

(Matuschek)