
Black God, White Devil (Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol)

Antonio Barrenechea (University of Mary Washington)

Black God, White Devil is a 1964 film directed by Brazilian auteur Glauber
Rocha.  Shot on location in the Brazilian serto, it launched the cinema
novo movement and embodied the aspirations of a new political cinema, as
outlined in Rochas 1965 essay An Esthetic of Hunger.  Black God, White
Devil forms a trilogy with Terra em Transe (1967) and Antonio das Mortes
(1969).  It revolutionized the national film industry by merging the
European avant-garde cinema (Soviet montage, Italian Neorealism, French New
Wave) and Brazilian folk traditions.

In the film, a couple fleeing from poverty and law enforcement explore two
ways of feeding their physical and spiritual hunger.  Both of these prove
unfulfilling.  The first is by joining the messianic cult of a beato or
saint (the black God).  The second is by following a cangaceiro, an
archetypal bandit from the serto (the white Devil).  Black God, White
Devil shifted attention away from the dominant chanchada musical comedy in
favor of an epic drama set on Brazils northeastern backlands. The highly
symbolic plot fuses poetically with a soundtrack punctuated by Heitor Villa-
Loboss Bachianas Brasileiras.  Stylized performances, handheld camera
shots, elliptical editing, and nonsynchronous sound disrupt traditional
viewing habits, while also culminating in the dialectical fulfillment of a
filmic refrain: The serto will become sea, and the sea serto.

Johnson, R. and Stam, R. (eds.) (1982) Brazilian Cinema, New York: Columbia
University Press. (This is widely considered to be one of the best volumes
on Brazilian film.  It includes Rochas An Esthetic of Hunger and a
brilliant interpretive chapter on Black God, White Devil.)

King, J. (1990) Magical Reels: A History of Cinema in Latin America, London
and New York: Verso. (King provides an excellent overall discussion of
Latin American cinema, including Brazilian cinema novo and the chanchada
genre staples that preceded it.)

Martin, M. (ed.) (1997) New Latin American Cinema (Vol. 1), Detroit: Wayne
State University Press. (This volume is a good introduction to the ideology
of Third Cinema and in connection with Brazil.  It includes a reprint of
An Esthetic of Hunger from the Johnson/Stam volume.)

Nagib, L. (2007) Brazil on Screen: Cinema Novo, New Cinema, Utopia, London
and New York: I.B. Taurus. (This book uses the image of the sea-serto as
established in Black God, White Devil to explain the recurring motif of
water in Brazilian cinema history.)


