
Raphal Ingelbien

Aestheticism

Aestheticism refers to a late-Victorian tendency to argue that  art  is  its
own justification  and  should  therefore  be  judged  by  purely  aesthetic
criteria. Closely related to the doctrine  of  lart  pour  lart  (art  for
arts sake) put forward by Thophile Gautier and to  the  radical  aesthetic
theories of Charles  Baudelaire,  British  aestheticism  found  its  leading
exponent in Walter Pater. His work had an immediate and profound  impact  on
writers and artists like Oscar Wilde,  who  are  sometimes  referred  to  as
aesthetes, and more often as decadents, and his lasting influence  has  been
traced in the work of several major modernist writers.

As a category of English  literary  history,  the  term  aestheticism  is  a
relatively recent scholarly construction, although  words  like  aesthetes
and  aesthetic  were  used  by  contemporaries  to  designate  this  late-
Victorian phenomenon. The Greek word  refers  to  that  which  is
perceptible by the senses; in modern  European  thought,  aesthetics  is  a
branch of philosophy that  analyses  the  ways  in  which  artworks  produce
sensations in spectators, and more broadly  the  nature  and  role  of  art.
Originally, the  aesthetic  movement  in  British  culture  was  a  reaction
against a utilitarian world view that left too little room for  the  pursuit
of beauty. Mid-Victorian artists  and  writers  like  John  Ruskin,  William
Morris and his Arts and Crafts movement, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and the pre-
Raphaelite Brotherhood all criticized the  plainness  of  the  modern  world
that had been created by the industrial revolution. They advocated a  return
to the art of the middle  ages  and  the  Renaissance,  and  encouraged  the
creation of  beautiful  environments  produced  by  handicraft.  Since  they
emphasized the social and  moral  implications  of  art,  their  aesthetic
attitude differs  from  a  more  radical  aestheticism  that  separated  the
pursuit of beauty from  political,  ethical  and  practical  considerations.
This kind of  aestheticism  is  associated  with  the  influence  of  French
theories, such as Thophile Gautiers insistence on  lart  pour  lart  and
Charles Baudelaires relentless emphasis on  artistic  and  poetic  novelty.
Its main expression in English literature is the work of Walter Pater (1839-
1894), a reclusive Oxford don whose writings on art were avidly  read  by  a
whole generation of fin-de-sicle aesthetes.
Paters most influential essays  were  highly  subjective  appreciations  of
works of art (ranging from obscure late-mediaeval French texts to  the  Mona
Lisa) where he  emphasized  the  necessity  for  readers  or  spectators  to
analyse their own private responses to art. In his  infamous  conclusion  to
The  Renaissance  (1873),  Pater   seemed   to   provide   a   philosophical
justification for the  restless  pursuit  of  aesthetic  sensations  at  the
expense of all  other  considerations.  The  relativism  that  pervades  his
writings is obvious in the opening  sentence:  To  regard  all  things  and
principles of things as inconstant  modes  of  fashion  has  more  and  more
become the tendency of modern thought. Human existence  was  reduced  to  a
series of loose impressions, each of which Pater saw as the  impression  of
the individual in isolation, each mind keeping as  a  solitary  prisoner  in
his own dream of a world. Faced with a  potentially  dispiriting  sense  of
transience, the individual was invited to make the most out of each  moment:
To burn always with this hard, gem-like flame, to  maintain  this  ecstasy,
is success in life. Such success could most safely be  found  through  the
love of art for its own sake: for art comes  to  you  proposing  frankly  to
give nothing but the highest quality to  your  moments  as  they  pass,  and
simply for those moments sake.
In  such  formulations,  Pater  was  radicalising  the  insights  of  German
aesthetic philosophy, which had  defined  art  as  having  a  purposiveness
without  a  purpose  (Kant),  and  was  also  obviously  echoing  Thophile
Gautiers lart pour lart. His statements caused  a  considerable  stir  in
Britain: young dandies saw them as a rationale for  an  a-moral  cultivation
of beauty, and Pater stood accused  of  corrupting  youth  with  unwholesome
ideas. A quiet, publicity-shy man, Pater tried to limit the furore that  his
writings had unleashed: he insisted  that  morality,  being  part  of  human
faculties, should not be neglected in the harmonious development  of  mans
entire organism, and he suppressed his conclusion in the second edition  of
The Renaissance, arguing that  he  had  been  misinterpreted.  This  was  of
little avail: Paters aesthetic philosophy became  associated  with  writers
and artists who were  sometimes  labelled  as  aesthetes  and  more  often
branded as decadents. The pursuit of extreme sensations, a taste  for  the
artificial,  the  quaint,  the  bizarre,  the  divorce  between  beauty  and
morality could all be traced back to some aspect of Paters writings, or  at
least to a selective reading of his work.  In  the  hands  of  Oscar  Wilde,
Paters ideas became popularized through  extravagant  attitudes  that  duly
attracted publicity and controversy.
Paters aestheticism, however,  was  influential  beyond  the  fin-de-sicle
atmosphere associated with Wilde and other decadents. Echoes of his  thought
have been traced in the theory and fiction of  writers  who  are  associated
with early modernism, like Henry James and Joseph Conrad, and  in  the  work
of such paragons of English modernism  as  Virginia  Woolf  or  T.S.  Eliot.
Paters cosmopolitan openness to French and German aesthetic  theories,  his
emphasis  on  subjectivity,  on  the  relativity  of  both   knowledge   and
existence, and on the self-reflexive and self-justifying character  of  art,
all  fed  into  various  aspects  of  modernist  thinking.  Paters  subtle,
impressionistic  style  was  quite  idiosyncratic,  but  it  also  had   its
modernist admirers: when W.B. Yeats edited the Oxford Book of  Modern  Verse
1892-1935, he opened his selection with Paters  prose  description  of  the
Mona Lisa, which he turned into a piece of free verse for the occasion.
Paters aestheticism was clearly instrumental in  paving  the  way  for  the
development  of  modernist  thought  in  England,  and  his  work  is  often
discussed in studies that chart the rise of English modernism.


Works by Walter Pater

Pater, Walter. (1998) The Renaissance, ed. Adam Phillips, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pater, Walter. (1990) Essays on Literature and Art, ed. Jenny Uglow,
London: Everyman.

Works on aestheticism

Denisoff, Dennis. (2007) Decadence and Aestheticism in The Cambridge
   Companion to the Fin de Sicle, ed. Gail Marshall, Cambridge, Cambridge
   University Press, pp. 3152.
Eastham, Andrew. (2011) Aesthetic Afterlives: Irony, Literary Modernity,
   and the Ends of Beauty, London: Continuum.
Freedman, Jonathan. (1990) Professions of Taste: Henry James, British
   Aestheticism and Commodity Culture, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Gaunt, William. (1975) The Aesthetic Adventure, 2nd edition, London:
Jonathan Cape.
Hamilton, Walter. (1882) The Aesthetic Movement in England, 3rd edition,
   London: Reeves and Turner.
Levenson, Michael H. (1986) A Genealogy of Modernism: A Study of English
   Literary Doctrine 1908-1922, Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
McGrath, F. C. (1986) The Sensible Spirit: Walter Pater and the Modernist
   Paradigm, Tampa: University of South Florida Press.
Meisel, Perry. (1980) The Absent Father: Virginia Woolf and Walter Pater,
   New Haven: Yale University Press.
Walter Pater and the Culture of the Fin-de-sicle, (1995) a special issue
   of Comparative Criticism 17.

[pic]


Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_Pater
