

Die Blaue Vier [The Blue Four] was founded in Weimar in March 1924 at the initiative of Galka E. Scheyer, who became the American representative of the four artists Lyonel Feininger, Alexei Jawlensky, Wassily Kandinsky, and Paul Klee. Although implying a direct link with and a continuation of the spiritual orientation of Der Blaue Reiter [The Blue Rider], the association was essentially a public relations effort — an attempt to put the works of the four artists under a common name in order to successfully exhibit and sell their works in the United States. Between 1925 and 1944, Scheyer organized Blue Four exhibitions in New York, Paolo Alto, San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, San Diego, Portland, Spokane, Seattle, Mexico City, Santa Barbara, Chicago, Northampton, and Honolulu. In the 1930s, Scheyer, believing that she could better present the artists’ work in a suitably arranged private setting, built a small gallery house on Blue Heights Drive in Hollywood. Scheyer’s personal collection of works by the Blue Four is now a part of the permanent collection of the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena.

Die Blaue Vier [The Blue Four] was founded in Weimar in March 1924 at the initiative of Galka E. Scheyer, who became the American representative of the four artists Lyonel Feininger, Alexei Jawlensky, Wassily Kandinsky, and Paul Klee. Although implying a direct link with and a continuation of the spiritual orientation of Der Blaue Reiter [The Blue Rider], the association was essentially a public relations effort — an attempt to put the works of the four artists under a common name in order to successfully exhibit and sell their works in the United States. Between 1925 and 1944, Scheyer organized Blue Four exhibitions in New York, Paolo Alto, San Francisco, Oakland, Los Angeles, San Diego, Portland, Spokane, Seattle, Mexico City, Santa Barbara, Chicago, Northampton, and Honolulu. In the 1930s, Scheyer, believing that she could better present the artists’ work in a suitably arranged private setting, built a small gallery house on Blue Heights Drive in Hollywood. Scheyer’s personal collection of works by the Blue Four is now a part of the permanent collection of the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena.



[File: B44.jpg]

Figure 1 Newspaper review, “Prophetess of ‘The Blue Four’: Mme Scheyer, The Blue Four and Their Art,” San Francisco Examiner, 1 November 1925.

Further reading:

(The Blue Four: Ferninger, Jawlensky, Kandinsky, Paul Klee)



 (Helfenstein)



(Barnett)