
BRAKHAGE, Stan (b. January 14 1933, Kansas City; d. 9 March 2003,  Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada)

Stan Brakhage (born Robert Sanders) was an American  filmmaker  and  one  of
the most important figures of experimental cinema, noted for  his  abstract,
lyrical style. His eclectic body of  work  ranges  from  narrative  to  non-
narrative features, animation as well  as  virtually  unclassifiable  pieces
that combine film with painting and  collage.  Brakhage  is  known  for  his
complex techniques such as  rapid,  rhythmic  cutting,  multiple  exposures,
scratching  the  emulsion,  and  painting  or  applying  organic   materials
directly on celluloid.

After dropping out of Darmouth College and the San Francisco Art  Institute,
Brakhage moved to New York in 1954, where he began associating with  artists
like Maya Deren, Jonas Mekas, Marie Menken, Joseph  Cornell  (with  whom  he
collaborated on 1960s Gnir Rednow and 1955s Centuries of  June)  and  John
Cage (who provided the soundtrack for 1955s In Between).

Recognition came somewhat slowly for Brakhage and in the  late  50s  had  to
turn to making industrial shorts for a living. By the late 60s  however,  he
was a reputed artist and started teaching aesthetics and  film  at  the  Art
Institute of Chicago and the University of Colorado. In 2002 he retired  and
settled in Canada where he died an year later.

Stan Brakhages body of work is vast (around 400 films),  diverse,  and  far
more eclectic than those of Jonas Mekas or Marie Menken,  with  whom  he  is
sometimes compared. Most of  his  works  shun  narrative,  cohering  instead
around recurring sets of  images  assembled  via  complexly  timed  editing:
Window Water Baby Moving (1959) presents the birth of  his  daughter  Myrena
as a set of permutations involving light streaming through  windows,  images
of Brakhages wife, Jane at various stages in her pregnancy, and the  moment
of the birth of the child itself. The increasingly  rapid  pace  of  editing
builds towards an epiphany that culminates with the child emerging into  the
world. At the opposite end of the spectrum is The Act of Seeing  with  Ones
Own Eyes (1971) , which is an unnervingly graphic footage of autopsies  shot
in a Pittsburgh morgue and a veritable memento mori for the modern world.

Brakhage considered cinema a form of moving  visual  thinking,  free  from
the constricting structures of language, which he  called  a  damnation  of
human  sensibility  (1997:  36).  The  vast  majority  of  his  films   are
completely silent. His interest in the biology of vision led  him  to  study
the perception of light and  the  closed-eye  vision  -  the  image  after
effects, shapes and colors we perceive with our eyes closed,  and  which  he
sought to emulate in his films. Such a form of filmmaking  is  not  only  a-
linguistic, but it also deliberately shuns the  limitations  of  traditional
compositional perspective, and instead thrives in  the  absence  of  clearly
articulated images. Essentially, Brakhage is search is for  a  near-mystical
experience, where the process of reception dominates interpretation and  art
becomes a process of  pure  subjective  interiority.  Films  like  Mothlight
(1963),  made  without  a  camera,  by  gluing  insect  wings  and  bits  of
vegetation  to  the  film  strip,  Chinese  Series  (2003),  which  Brakhage
scratched directly on celluloid during the last weeks of his life, or  Glaze
of Cathexis (1990) with its colorful painted and scratched  over  images  of
trees, have an almost textural feel that transcends the very notion of  what
cinema can achieve.

References sand further reading:

Brakhage, Stan (1989). Film at Wit's End: Eight Avant-Garde Filmmakers.
Kingston, N.Y.: McPherson & Company.

Brakhage, Stan (2003). Telling Time: Essays of a Visionary Filmmaker.
McPherson & Company

Brakhage, Stan (1997). Another Way of Looking at the Universe. Interview
with Ronald Johnson. Chicago Rewiew 47/48. 4-1. 31-37

Elder, R. Bruce (1999). The Films of Stan Brakhage in the American
Tradition of Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein, and Charles Olson. Waterloo:
Wilfrid Laurier University Press.

Selected Filmography

Window Water Baby Moving (1969)

Dog Star Man (1961-1964)

The Act of seeing with Ones Own Eyes (1971)

23rd Psalm Branch (1967)

The Garden of Earthly Delights (1981)

Commingled Containers (1997)

Delicacies of Molten Horror Synapse (1991)

Glaze of Cathexis (1990)

Mothlight (1963)

Chinese Series (2003)



Paratextual material:

http://vimeo.com/60303969 - Brakhage discusses 23rd Psalm Branch - a film
he created in response to the Vietnam War

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hdKsPsg_AX4 - Glaze of Cathexis on YouTube

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yt3nDgnC7M8 - Mothlight on YouTube



Maria Ioni
Ryerson University

