
Brandt, MarianneMARIANNE BRANDT (1893-1983)

Best remembered for her metal designs, Marianne Brandt created the small
tea extract pot that set a record in 2007 for the highest sum ever paid for
a BauhausAUHAUS object. While her work in metal has become iconic, other
aspects of Brandts diverse uvre and her influence on the Bauhaus still
remain little studied.
      Born Marianne Liebe to an upper-middle class family in the industrial
city of Chemnitz, she received her diploma as a painter in 1918 from
Weimars Grand Ducal Saxon College of Fine Art (Grossherzogliche-Schsische
Hochschule fr Bildende Kunst). She married the Norwegian artist Erik
Brandt, and they spent the next two years in Norway and France. Brandt had
begun a new course of study in sculpture at the College of Fine Arts in
Weimar in 1923 when she saw the State Bauhaus Exhibition (Staatliches
Bauhaus Ausstellung) and was inspired to begin her studies anew at the
Bauhaus. Brandt completed the Preliminary Course (Vorkurs) under the
direction of JosefOSEF AlbersLBERS and Llszl Mmoholy-Nnagy. At the
latters suggestion she apprenticed at the Metal Workshop, one of the most
male-dominated divisions of the school. Brandt experienced some hazing but
also had immediate success with the sleek designs and pure forms of her
metal tea services and other household items. These epitomized the schools
turn away from craft to a spirit of Art and Technology, a New Unity, in
Walter Gropiuss words. The esteem in which Gropius held Brandts work is
evidenced by the selection of her lighting fixtures in much of the schools
second home, the Gropius-designed Bauhaus Dessau, to which it moved in
1926.
      The melding of art and technology is evident in other aspects of
Brandts work as well, particularly her photographs in experimental, New
Vision modes. She also made at least forty-five complex and culturally
critical photomontages during her Bauhaus years. She worked particularly
intensely in this medium while on a year-long sabbatical from the Bauhaus
in Paris from 1926-27.
      Over the span of her association with the Metal Workshop, Brandt rose
quickly through its ranks. She became the shops assistant (Mitarbeiter) in
1927, and, when Moholy-Nagy left the Bauhaus in 1928, Brandt became acting
director. She negotiated numerous contracts for the production of her and
others lamp designs with the Berlin firm of Schwinzer & Grff and
Leipzigs Krting & Mathiesen. Brandt was the only woman to receive her
diploma from the Metal Workshop, which she did upon leaving the Bauhaus in
the summer of 1929.
      After half a year working in Gropiuss Berlin office, Brandt became
head of design for the division of household goods at the Ruppelwerk in
Gotha. She overhauled their entire product line, yet she would later
express frustration at how little creative freedom she had in this work.
Ruppels fortunes worsened through the ongoing financial crisis, and Brandt
lost her position late in 1932. After her initial attempts to secure work
in Hamburg or Oslo proved fruitless, she returned home to Chemnitz at her
familys request in 1933. Brandt was unable to obtain steady work during
the National Socialist period, but she did continue to paint and
photograph. When an Allied bomb raid in World War II severely damaged her
family home, Brandt spent the next years redesigning and rebuilding it.
Multitalented Bauhusler that she was, she completed much of the
construction herself.
      As in the Nazi period, Brandts life in East Germany was not easy, but
through her teaching she was an important conduit of Bauhaus ideas and
philosophy. In 1949-51, she taught at the Dresden College of Arts and
Craft (Hochschule fr Werkkunst) under the direction of Mart Stam, and
spent the next three years in Berlin-Weiensee as an industrial designer at
the College for Applied Arts (Hochschule fr angewandte Kunst). She
traveled to Beijing and Shanghai with her exhibition German Applied Arts
of the GDR in 1954. Brandt lived the rest of her life in or near Chemnitz
(then Karl-Marx Stadt). As the East German regime slowly began to recognize
the significance of the Bauhaus, Brandts work likewise began to be a
source of interest and the subject of a few group exhibitions. Today, a
number of Brandts metal designs are again in production, and her original
designs and photomontages are prized possessions in major collections of
modern art.


References and further reading:

Brandt, Marianne. Letter to the Younger Generation. (1971) Bauhaus and
      Bauhaus People. Eckhard Neumann, ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.,
      1992., 97-101.

Droste, Magdelene. The Bauhaus Object between Authorship and Anonymity.
      In Bauhaus Construct: Fashioning Identity, Discourse, and Modernism,
      eds. Jeffrey Saletnik and Robin Schuldenfrei. New York: Routledge,
      2009, 215-221.

Mller, Ulrike. Marianne Brandt. Bauhaus Women: Art, Handicraft, Design.
      Ed. Ulrike Mller. Paris: Flammarion, 2009, 118-125.

Otto, Elizabeth. Tempo, Tempo! The Bauhaus Photomontages of Marianne
      Brandt. Berlin: Bauhaus-Archiv and Jovis Verlag, 2005.

---_____. A Schooling of the Senses: Post Dada Visual Experiments in
      the Bauhaus Photomontages of Lszl Moholy-Nagy and Marianne Brandt,
      New German Critique 107, 36:2 (Summer 2009), 89-131.

Weber, Klaus, ed. Die Metallwerkstatt am Bauhaus. Berlin: Bauhaus Archiv,
      1992.

Weise, Anne-Kathrin. Leben und Werk von Marianne Brandt. Dissertation,
      Humboldt University, Berlin. 1995.

Witkovsky, Matthew. Marianne Brandt: Our Unnerving City, 1926. Bauhaus
      1919-1933: Workshops for Modernity. Barry Bergdoll and Leah Dickerman.
      New York, Museum of Modern Art, 2009. 248-255.

Wynhoff, Elisabeth, ed. Marianne Brandt: Fotografieren am Bauhaus.
      Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2003.

