

Anthony Braxton, born 4 June 1945 in Chicago, Illinois, is an avant-garde jazz multi-instrumentalist and composer who performs and records primarily on saxophones. An active musician since the 1960s, Braxton was an early member of the AACM (Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians) — a Chicago-founded cooperative of African American avant-garde jazz musicians and composers. Braxton is a Professor of Music at Wesleyan University in Middleton, Connecticut, where he has taught since 1990. He was awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in 1994, and was named a 2014 National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master in 2013. His compositions have been performed by large-scale orchestras at Lincoln Centre in New York City, as well as other renowned venues that have often been reserved for classical music.  



Braxton’s notable early albums include Three Compositions of New Jazz (1968), released on the Chicago-based Delmark record label that released the first albums of many AACM members in the mid to late 1960s. Braxton’s double album For Alto, a solo recording, was released in 1970. Braxton has performed on many saxophones throughout his career, most notably the alto saxophone, but later soprano, sopranino, C-melody, F mezzo-soprano, baritone, bass, and contrabass saxophones. He has also performed on flute, the E-flat, B-flat, and contrabass clarinets, and the piano.   

Anthony Braxton, born 4 June 1945 in Chicago, Illinois, is an avant-garde jazz multi-instrumentalist and composer who performs and records primarily on saxophones. An active musician since the 1960s, Braxton was an early member of the AACM (Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians) — a Chicago-founded cooperative of African American avant-garde jazz musicians and composers. Braxton was a Professor of Music at Wesleyan University in Middleton, Connecticut, where he taught from 1990 until his retirement in December 2013. He was awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in 1994, and was named a 2014 National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master in 2013. His compositions have been performed by large-scale orchestras at Lincoln Centre in New York City, as well as other renowned venues that have often been reserved for classical music.    



Braxton’s notable early albums include Three Compositions of New Jazz (1968), released on the Chicago-based Delmark record label that released the first albums of many AACM members in the mid to late 1960s. Braxton’s double album For Alto, a solo recording, was released in 1970. Braxton has performed on many saxophones throughout his career, most notably the alto saxophone, but later soprano, sopranino, C-melody, F mezzo-soprano, baritone, bass, and contrabass saxophones. He has also performed on flute, the E-flat, B-flat, and contrabass clarinets, and the piano. 



Over the course of his musical career, Braxton has released works for opera, large-scale orchestra, and his avant-garde interpretation of traditional jazz standards. Braxton often names his avant-garde compositions as diagrams, and they have progressed to incorporate drawings and illustrations. Braxton’s diagrams are usually labelled with cryptic numbers and letters. The titles of these pieces themselves may be musical notation indicating to the performer how to play the piece.        

Further reading:

 (Broomer)



(Heffley)



(Lock)



(Radano)