
Agitprop Theatre

Now widely used as a catch-all term to describe politically combative or
oppositional art, agitprop originated from the early Soviet conjunction
of propaganda (raising awareness of an issue) and agitation (exciting an
emotional response to the issue), as theorized by Lenin in What Is To Be
Done (1902) and institutionalized in the many departments and commissions
of Agitation and Propaganda in the USSR and the Comintern after the Russian
Revolution. The portmanteau term conveys the terse telegraphic efficiencies
of Bolshevik bureaucratic rhetoric. Considered both as a mode of artistic
production and a set of formal characteristics, agitprop had an immense
impact on modernist cultural practice, particularly in graphic design,
visual art, and theatre.

In the theatre, agitprop developed in Russia and Germany as a mobile form
of exhortative revolutionary theatre designed for quick outdoor
performance. It was adaptive to location, audience, and cast, and suited
the sightlines and acoustics of outdoor performance in found spaces. Short
phrases, heavy cadence, and repetition allowed performance to project
through noisy and unruly audiences. The form achieved widespread popularity
in the brief period between the mid-1920s and the coalescence of the
Popular Front in 1934, when artistic and political radicalisms aligned in a
vision of an artistic practice mobilized by international proletarian
modernity; in this, agitprop was theorized as the theatricalization of
modernity.

The spread of agitprop as a principal tactic of the Workers Theatre
Movement began with the adaptation of German practices in North America and
Europe. A formative figure was Hans Bohn, a German communist activist who
moved to New York to organize in the German community, changed his name to
John Bonn, and founded Prolet-Buehne in 1925. Prolet-Buehnes drilled,
choreographic performances, with emphasis on choral recitations and mass
chant, established a template for agitprop troupes such as the Shock Troupe
of the Workers Laboratory Theatre in New York and the Toronto-based
Workers Experimental Theatre. Bonn also founded the magazine Workers
Theatre and established the League of Workers Theatres, which functioned
as the organizational and ideological centres that linked the North
American workers theatres to the Comintern.

At its peak, encouraged by the Comintern, agitprop was proposed as a new
form of proletarian modernism. One of the most important articulations of
its theory was Al Saxes 1934 essay Newsboy: From Script to Performance,
which theorized the plays fusion of fragmented dialogue, imagery, rapid
movement, and repetition as a performance machine driven by dialectic and
tempo rather than dramatic causality. The notion of agitpop as evidence of
trans-national proletarian culture led to its centrality in mass
competitions, such as the 1932 Spartakiade in New York and the 1933
Revolutionary Theatre Olympiad in Moscow, in which troupes were scored on
the basis of technical competence, tempo, movement, and ideological
clarity.

Despite such attempts to systematize agitprop, radical performance
proliferated in a vast number of forms, including puppetry, vaudeville, and
ballet. By the mid-1930s, a growing tendency towards more complex dramatic
models stigmatized agitprop as immature and politically sectarian. As later
recalled by Ewan MacColl, who had started performing agitprops in the late
1920s in Manchester with his troupe Red Megaphone, artists began to seek
ways to make their work more theatrically complex and dramatically
intelligent. This shift had the effect of taking them off the streets and
into theatre spaces that enabled experimentation with scenography and
design. The waning of militancy that marked the arrival of the Popular
Front nudged radical groups to tone down the rhetoric of class war. The
proponents of agitprop attempted to mediate the emergence of Popular Front
social realism; thus, Bonn wrote in 1932 that we need both types as
weapons in the class struggle, the flashlight effect of the mobile up-to-
date agit-prop theatre as well as the impetus of the slower but broad
attack of the more complicated stationary theatre (Situation and Tasks
8). As radical troupes realigned their politics, Clifford Odetss Waiting
for Lefty (1935) circulated internationally as a useful bridge from
agitprop to the new doctrine of socialist realism.

Although workers theatre groups repudiated agitprop as inartistic and
sectarian, Bertolt Brecht demonstrated its pedagogical capacity in his
lehrstucke, particulary in The Measures Taken (1930). In the 1960s, a
widespread revival of agitprop, variously known as street theatre or
guerilla theatre, became a common counter-cultural protest tactic that
continues in the present day.


References and Further Reading

Bonn, John. (1932) Situation and Tasks of the Workers Theatre in the
U.S.A., Workers Theatre (June-July): 8.

Brecht, Bertolt. (1997) The Decision [The Measures Taken], Collected Plays:
Three, ed. and trans.John Willett, London: Methuen.

Levine, Ira A. (1985) Left-Wing Dramatic Theory in the American Theatre,
Ann Arbor: UMI.

Endres, Robin, and Richard Wright. (eds.) (1976) Eight Men Speak and Other
Plays from the Canadian Workers Theatre, Toronto: New Hogtown.

MacColl, Ewan. (1990) Journeyman: An Autobiography, London: Sidgwick &
Jackson.

Saxe, Al. ([1934] 1985) Newsboy: From Script to Performance, reprinted in
Theatres of the Left: 1888-1935; Workers Theatre Movements in Britain and
America, ed. Raphael Samuel, Ewan MacColl, and Stuart Cosgrove, London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 289-296

Stourac, Richard, and Kathleen McCreery. (1986) Theatre as a Weapon:
Workers Theatre in the Soviet Union, Germany and Britain, 1917-1934,
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Alan Filewod, University of Guelph
Recommended Illustrations

[pic]
An early Soviet agitprop train.
[Source: http://275design.wordpress.com/2010/12/07/8-dec-propaganda-and-
protest/]



[pic]

The Drummers, a German agitprop troupe.
[Reproduced in Willett, John. (1978) Art and Politics in the Weimar Period,
New York: Pantheon: 157.]

