
BRESSON, Robert (b. 25 September 1901, Bromont-Lamothe, France; d. - 18
December 1999, Paris, France)

Robert  Bresson  was  a  film  director  and  one  of  the  most   important
representatives of French cinema. His stark,  austere  style  and  focus  on
moral and theological themes has often been compared to  Dostoyevskys.  His
films have been a major influence on the  work  of  Andrei  Tarkovsky,  Paul
Schrader and Michael Haneke.

Bressons filmography is relatively small (13 films), despite spanning over
50 years. Although his first two films - Les anges du pch [The Angels of
Sin] (1943) and Les dames du Bois de Boulogne [The Ladies of Bois de
Boulogne] (1945) - are more conventional in style and plotting, by his
third feature,  Journal d'un cur de campagne[Diary of a Country Priest]
(1951), Bresson adopted a distinctive style marked by an extreme visual
sparseness, meticulous composition, the use of natural sound occasionally
interspersed with classical music (usually Bach) and a type of realism so
repetitive and fragmented as to border on abstraction. For instance, simple
objects like a coil of rope or items of clothing are carefully and closely
scrutinized, while gestures like washing, climbing stairs or pickpocketing
turn into a nearly monastic routine. This sense of abstraction is further
reinforced by his preference for close-ups and abrupt cuts, techniques
which, as David Bordwell notes, strongly resemble those of the Soviet avant-
garde.

Bresson disapproved of sets and professional actors and  he  dispensed  with
both after his second feature, shooting entirely  on  location  and  working
with non-professional casts (often chosen for  their  androgynous,  hieratic
features), to whom he used  to  refer  as  models  and  instructed  to  be
deliberately expressionless and neutral.

But at heart, Bresson was also a transcendentalist, even if he was often a
somber, almost cruel one; the minimalistic, frequently severe world of his
films hides a constant search for grace and redemption. Bresson was
strongly influenced by Catholic theology, particularly by Pascals
Jansenism.. His films are tragic and harsh but never pitiless, and his
protagonists inevitably suffer greatly or inflict suffering themselves: the
young priest from Diary of a Country Priest martyrs himself through an
ascetic way of life and diet, and is eventually killed by cancer (his final
words are all is grace). Michel, the protagonist of Pickpocket (1959)
steals out of a Raskolnikovian superiority complex, but later suffers in
prison. In Un condamn  mort s'est chapp ou Le vent souffle o il veut
[A Man Escaped] (1956), French Resistance member Fontaine lives with the
constant threat of execution, but must also determine whether he should
kill his young cellmate whom he suspects of being a spy. In Au hasard
Balthazar [Balthazar] (1966) the life of a French village is depicted
through the eyes of a humble donkey, whose suffering from birth to death is
all the more moving for its patience. One cay say, Balthazar is Bressons
most remarkable character - a being of complete opacity whose expressions
are purely physical, yet whom we are asked to understand and to empathize
with on a transcendent level. Finally, Yvon, the protagonist of Bressons
last, darkest film, L'argent[Money] (1983) is framed for counterfeiting
and ends up robbing and killing several people. Nonetheless, at the end of
each film, grace emerges, but only after the characters have stoically
internalized and accepted the cruelty of the world.

References and Further reading:
Affron, Mirella Jona (1985) Bresson  and  Pascal:  Rhetorical  Affinities.
Quarterly Review of Film Studies 10.2: 118-134
Bresson, Robert (1997) Notes on the Cinematographer. Green Integer
Quandt, James ed. (2011) Robert Bresson Toronto: Cinematheque Ontario
Schrader, Paul (1972) Transcendental Style in Film:  Ozu,  Bresson,  Dreyer.
Berkeley, University of California Press
Sontag, Susan (1966) Spiritual Style  in  the  Films  of  Robert  Bresson.
Against interpretation,  and  other  essays.  New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  &
Giroux. 177-196
Selected Filmography:
Les affaires publiques [Public Affairs] (1934)
Les anges du pch [The Angels of Sin] (1943)
Les dames du Bois de Boulogne [The Ladies of Bois de Boulogne] (1945)
Journal d'un cur de campagne[Diary of a Country Priest] (1951)
Un condamn  mort s'est chapp ou Le vent souffle o il veut [A Man
Escaped] (1956)
Procs de Jeanne d'Arc [The Trial of Joan of Arc] (1962)
Au hasard Balthazar  [Balthazar] (1966)
Le diable probablement [The Devil, Probably] (1977)
L'argent[Money] (1983)
Paratextual materials:
Two interviews with Bresson:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVODh2lkVdc
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FRAztry-ZoI
http://vimeo.com/52312154 - Video essay by David Bordwell on Bressons use
of editing.
Maria Ioni
Ryerson University



