

Author: Jessica Stephenson

Ainslie, Bill (1934-1989)

Born in 1934 in Bedford, Eastern Cape, South Africa, William (Bill) Stewart
Ainslie was a painter and educator, and the founder of a number of visual
art programs and workshops that countered discriminatory racial and
educational policies in apartheid-era South Africa. These programs
encouraged students to work in abstract and other modernist idioms not
practiced in the country at the time. Until his untimely death at age 55,
Ainslie melded his career as an artist with his vision of art as a means to
combat apartheid. In the 1960s and 1970s, Ainslie fostered the only
multiracial art programs in the country, culminating in a formal art
school, the non-profit Johannesburg Art Foundation (1982). He helped found
the Federated Union of Black Artists (FUBA) and the art schools Fuba
Academy (1978), Funda Center (1983) (funda means learn in Xhosa), and the
Alexandra Arts Centre (1986). The generation of modern African artists and
educators trained at these institutions shaped the course of art after
apartheid. Ainslie also organized short-term workshops, most notably the
Thupelo Art Workshop (thupelo means to teach by example in Southern
Sotho) in 1983. Thupelo linked local and international artists and focused
on abstraction, a radical departure from the social realist style expected
of politically engaged South African art of the 1980s.

Ainslies life-long commitment to the arts and to combating racial
prejudice began during his undergraduate studies. While studying at Natal
University in the mid 1950s he met artist Selby Mvusi, who educated him
about the need to develop modern art initiatives for black South Africans.
After completing the BFA in 1958, Ainslie began his career teaching art at
the Cyrene Mission in Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe).  He established himself as
an artist in 1960, exhibiting at Adler Fielding Gallery in Johannesburg. He
achieved notable success, winning numerous awards from Art SA Today and
exhibiting at prominent galleries including Goodman Gallery in
Johannesburg. He refused to exhibit at venues that supported apartheid
policies.

Ainslies early work was figurative and expressionist. The social-issues
bent of his subject matter  farm laborers, African women, and street
urchins  aligned him with the work of modernist black artists like Gerard
Sekoto, Durant Shilahli, Ephraim Ngatane and Louis Maqhubela. By the late
1960s, he had embraced abstraction through exposure to South African artist
Douglas Portway, who was inspired by American Abstract Expressionism.
Ainslie looked also to the work of Jackson Pollock and Robert Motherwell,
as well as the writings of Karl Jung and Sufi philosopher Idries Shah. In
the Namib series he explored a minimalist color field approach; later his
work shifted to large-scale expressive abstractions featuring strong
textural brush marks, layered colour, and expansive spaces as seen in
Pachipamwe III. Ainslies shift to abstraction occurred at a time when
politically conscious South African artists were increasingly expected to
conform to a socially critical content and realist style. Ainslie
considered abstraction to be a defiant and revolutionary form of art, one
that offered black and white artists an alternative idiom to the accepted
conventions of the day. His work is in the collections of the South African
National Art Gallery, Cape Town, Durban Art Gallery, the University of
Witwatersrand Gallery and the Johannesburg Art Gallery, in addition to
collections beyond South Africa, including Chase Manhattan Bank and the
ExxonMobil oil company, New York.

Of great importance is Ainslies role as educator. Ainslie offered informal
lessons in drawing and painting to black and white students, a practice he
started in 1964. These multi-racial art classes contravened the color bar
of the Group Areas and Separate Amenities acts; Ainslie was under constant
pressure and surveillance by authorities. He also fostered workshop
environments, sharing his studio with established artists such as Dumile
Feni, Esrom Legae, Ben Arnold, Lucky Sibiya, and Eric Mbatha. These
experiences informed his lifelong belief in the workshop as a means to
create community, experiment with new techniques, and share ideas. By the
early 1970s, instruction was formalized into the Bill Ainslie Studios,
renamed the Art Foundation in 1982. Here Ainslie enacted the principles
presented in a resolution at the seminal 1979 State of Art in South Africa
Conference: modern art education should help create a post-apartheid
society. Graduates of the Ainslie Studio and Art Foundation include David
Koloane, William Kentridge, and Simon Stone.

Ainslie worked to create art centers and workshops throughout Southern
Africa that were linked nationally and internationally. The centers that he
helped establish in the late 1970s and 1980s, including Fuba, Funda, and
the Alexandra Art Center, provided black South Africans with access to
modern art training at a time when there were few other options. Ainslie
also helped organize the important anti-apartheid event, the Gaborone
Festival of 1982. During the height of South African state repression and
isolation from international arenas in the 1980s, Ainslie and David Koloane
founded the Thupelo Art Workshop. At the two-week Thupelo workshops,
artists such as Dumisani Mabaso, Garth Erasmus, and Lionel Davis
experimented with novel techniques and methods in the form of abstraction
and free-form expression. The Thupelo experiments had a notable impact on
the direction South African art took after the end of apartheid in 1994.
Thupelo also created international connections through its affiliation with
the Triangle Workshop in New York. It brought visitors to South Africa,
including American abstract expressionist Peter Bradley and art critic
Kenneth Moffett.

In 1988, Ainslie helped to establish international artist workshops based
throughout Southern Africa, including Pachipamwe (1988) in Zimbabwe and
Thapong (1989) in Botswana. These workshops led to the establishment of a
network of modern art workshops across Africa from the 1990s on. On August
26, 1989, Bill Ainslie was killed in a car accident while returning from
the Pachipamwe workshop at Cyrene Mission in Zimbabwe.

References and Further Reading:

Peffer, J. (2009) Art and the End of Apartheid. Minneapolis: University if
Minnesota Press, 129  170.

Bill Anslie: Artist, Educator, Humanitarian. http://www.billainslie.com/
(online). Accessed 29 February 2014.


Image Caption:

Pachipamwe III, 1989. Source: http://www.billainslie.com/?page_id=80

[pic]
