

Canadian painter Emily Carr was born in Victoria, British Columbia, on December 13, 1871, the second youngest of nine children in a middle-class English family. Western Canada in the nineteenth century offered few opportunities for engagement with art, so Carr spent several years abroad learning her craft in San Francisco, Paris, and London. In 1927, Carr was invited to participate in a major exhibition of west coast art at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. There she met other Canadian artists, including the influential Group of Seven. Carr’s early work was influenced by European Modernism, specifically Post-Impressionism and Expressionism, and is characterized by vibrant colour and active brushstrokes. Between 1899 and 1933, Carr visited a number of remote villages from Vancouver Island to Alaska. Landscapes, monumental sculpture, and Indigenous people she encountered during her travels dominate her later work. Emily Carr died on March 2, 1945, after suffering a heart attack in Victoria, British Columbia. 

			Canadian painter Emily Carr was born in Victoria, British Columbia, on December 13, 1871, the second youngest of nine children in a middle-class English family. Western Canada in the nineteenth century offered few opportunities for engagement with art, so Carr spent several years abroad learning her craft in San Francisco, Paris, and London. In 1927, Carr was invited to participate in a major exhibition of west coast art at the National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. There she met other Canadian artists, including the influential Group of Seven. Carr’s early work was influenced by European Modernism, specifically Post-Impressionism and Expressionism, and is characterized by vibrant colour and active brushstrokes. Between 1899 and 1933, Carr visited a number of remote villages from Vancouver Island to Alaska. Landscapes, monumental sculpture, and Indigenous people she encountered during her travels dominate her later work. Emily Carr died on March 2, 1945, after suffering a heart attack in Victoria, British Columbia. 

Further reading:

(Hughes)



(Shadbolt)