Celtic Revival 

The Celtic Revival was a late nineteenth century resurgence of interest in Celtic history, languages and myth that crossed through many disciplines, most notably cultural anthropology, art history and literature. The Celtic Revival was most influential in Ireland, where it inspired the formation of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA; Cumann Lúthchleas Gael) in 1884, dedicated to the recovery of ancient Irish sports. In 1893, Douglas Hyde helped to establish the Gaelic League (Conradh na Gaeilge) in order to preserve the Irish language and promote Irish culture.  The Celtic Revival is also associated with the Irish Literary Revival. The ‘Celtic Twilight’, borrowed from the title of William Butler Yeats’s 1893 volume, is an alternate reference to this renaissance of Irish literature and poetry in the late eighteenth and early twentieth century. Inspired by the poetry of Thomas Moore, James Clarence Mangan, Samuel Ferguson and others, as well as the folktales published by Standish James O’Grady, Yeats established both the Irish Literary Society in London and the National Literary Society in Dublin in 1892. In 1899, Yeats established the Irish Literary Theatre, which would become the Irish National Theatre Society at the Abbey Theatre in Dublin in1904. Authors associated with the Abbey include Lady Augusta Gregory, Edward Martyn, George Russell (‘AE’) and John Millington Synge, whose controversial Playboy of the Western World provoked a riot in 1907. The Celtic Revival inspired both cultural and political nationalism, offering Ireland a heroic past and rich cultural heritage upon which to base its bid for political independence in the twentieth century.

Lisa Weihman, West Virginia University



References and further reading

Castle, G. (2001) Modernism and the Celtic Revival, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cronin, M., Murphy, W. and Rouse, P. (eds.) (2009) The Gaelic Athletic Association, 1884-2009, Dublin: Irish Academic Press.

Culleton, C. and McGarrity, M. (eds.) (2008) Irish Modernism and the Global Primitive, Palgrave MacMillan.

Deane, S. (1987) Celtic Revivals, Winston-Salem: Wake Forest University Press.

Synge, J, M. (1997) The Playboy of the Western World and Two Other Irish Plays, New York: Penguin Classics.

Gregory, A. (1987). Gods and Fighting Men, London: Colin Smythe.

Mathews, P. J. (2003) Revival: The Abbey Theatre, Sinn Féin, the Gaelic League, and the Co-Operative Movement. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.

McMahon, T. (2008) Grand Opportunity: The Gaelic Revival and Irish Society, 1893-1910, Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.

Watson, G. (1979) Irish Identity and the Literary Revival, London: Croom Helm.

Yeats, W, B. (1902) The Celtic Twilight. London: A. H. Bullen.

------ (1997) Collected Works, ed. R J. Finneran, New York: Scribner, 3 vols.

Young, E. (2002) Celtic Wonder Tales, Edinburgh: Floris Books.