
Chadwick, Lynn Russell Chadwick, CBE (1914  2003)

Lynn Chadwick rose to prominence, as a sculptor following his selection for
the British exhibition at the 1952 Venice Biennale New Aspects of British
Sculpture, where his works were displayed alongside objects by eight other
sculptors including Eduardo Paolozzi, and Bill Turnbull.  Lacking formal
artistic education but diversely influenced by Jacob Epstein and Naum Gabo,
as well as by his architectural training, Chadwick, with his fellow Venice
exhibitors, helped to define the wave of, mostly metal, abstract-figurative
sculpture that followed in the wake of Henry Moore's great international
success. Chadwick claimed a 'deliberate continuity' in his work. This
trajectory led from early mobiles in the 1940s and early 50s, such as The
Fisheater (1951), influenced in part by Alexander Calder and his
architectural mentor Rodney Thomas; through to simpler, balanced
constructions and solid, animal-like and figurative sculptures, often
produced in long-running series. In 1953 he received an honourable mention
for his entry in the Unknown Political Prisoner International Sculpture
Competition. But perhaps the highlight of Chadwick's career was beating
celebrated artists including Alberto Giacometti to the International
Sculpture Prize at the 1956 Venice Biennale. This award announced Chadwick
on the international stage and marked the beginning of his enduring
critical and commercial success.


Chadwick claimed a 'deliberate continuity' in his work. This trajectory led
from early mobiles from in the 1940s and early 50s, such as The Fisheater
(1951), influenced in part by Alexander Calder and his architectural mentor
Rodney Thomas; through to simpler, balanced constructions and solid, animal-
like and figurative sculptures, often produced in long-running series. In
1953 he received an honourable mention for his entry in the Unknown
Political Prisoner International Sculpture Competition. But perhaps the
highlight of Chadwick's career was beating celebrated artists including
Alberto Giacometti to the International Sculpture Prize at the 1956 Venice
Biennale. This award announced Chadwick on the international stage and
marked the beginning of his enduring critical and commercial success.

Lynn Chadwick was born in the Barnes area of London in November 1914, the
son of an engineer, Verner Russell Chadwick, and Margery Brown Lynn. He
undertook no formal artistic education in his youth, but much like his
contemporary Reg Butler, forged an oblique path into the practice of fine
art through a professional career. Owing to family pressure to secure a
decent income, between 1933  39 Chadwick worked as a draughtsman in a
variety of London-based architectural firms. Although he never qualified as
an architect, the experience undoubtedly influenced the young sculptor's
future practice.

Three of Chadwick's mobile works were commissioned for the 1951 Festival of
Britain. Subsequent standing metal works constituted a less complex
balancing of two or three elements, many of which were exhibited at the
1952 Venice Biennale display. The sharp edges and tooth- and claw-like
protrusions of these objects contributed to the formulation of Herbert
Read's famous description of Cold War era sculpture as employing a
'gGeometry of fFear'.

Chadwick progressed to creating linear iron constructions. After 1953, he
packed the voids and recesses of these structures with the industrial
compound stolit - , a mixture of iron filings and gypsum -, to create solid
figurative pieces. The surface of the filling material could be scored
whilst still pliable or chiselled and filed when set hard increasing the
play of light and shadow on the works' scumbled surfaces and to heighten
the suggestion of a bristled, defensive hide.

By the time of his 1956 International Sculpture Prize win, Chadwick was
producing the works for which he is best known, in which   paired 'half-
human personages' clad in rough drapery and with geometric featureless
heads stand, sit or recline side by side, such as Two Watchers V (, Second
Version, 1967).[1] A retrospective exhibition of his work subsequently
toured throughout Europe. His works were, at times in his earlier career,
viewed by critics and the wider public in Britain as challenging and
controversial. However, his Venice Biennale success and touring exhibitions
firmly established his international reputation and allowed for a greater
volume of international sales than many of his British artistic peers,
especially in America. In addition, he was awarded numerous international
commissions, most notably alongside David Smith and Alexander Calder at the
1962 Italian Festival dei Due Monde in Spoleto and a large sculptural group
for the 1988 Venice Biennale.

Chadwick married three times:; in 1942 to Charlotte Anne Secord, whom he
had met whilst training as a pilot in Toronto during the Second World War;
in 1959 to Frances Mary Jamieson and, finally, in 1964 to the Hungarian
photographer Eva Yvonne Rainer. In 1964 he was appointed CBE and, in 1985,
French Officier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. After 1959 Chadwick had
the means and support to cast many of his works in bronze and, towards the
end of his life, began to experiment with placement placingof his works in
the landscape around his home at Lypiatt Park in Gloucestershire.

References and Further Reading

Bowness, A. (1962), Lynn Chadwick, 'Art in Progress' series, London:
Methuen, London,. 1962

Farr, D. and Chadwick, E. (1990), Lynn Chadwick, Sculptor: with a Complete
Illustrated Catalogue, 1947  1988, Oxford: Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990.

Farr, D. (, 2003) Lynn Chadwick, exh. cat. London: Tate Publishing,
London,. 2003

Hodin, J.P. (1961),  Lynn Chadwick, 'Modern Sculptors' series, Zwemmer,
London: Zwemmer., 1961

List of WorksSuggested Images:
The Fisheater, 1951, Tate Gallery, London
Two Watchers V, Second Version, 1967, Stanford University Museum of Art,
Stanford, California, USA


-----------------------
[1]   Bowness, A., Lynn Chadwick, 'Art in Progress' series, Methuen,
London, 1962, unpaginated

