
Char, Ren (1907-88)
Sandra L. Bermann (Princeton University)

The French poet Ren Char exemplified key aspects of modernism.  Early
associated with Surrealism, he collaborated with poets such as Andr Breton
and Paul Eluard, and painters such as Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, and
Nicolas de Stael.  Later, during World War II, he led a Resistance unit in
the Maquis, winning renown as Capitaine Alexandre.  During this period he
continued to write, though he refused to publish until the war was won.  In
1946, Chars wartime journal, Leaves of Hypnos, appeared, soon followed by
his major collection, Fury and Mystery.  Acclaimed for both, he went on to
complete some of his best-known work in the 1950s and 1960s while engaging
with numerous artists and the musician Pierre Boulez.  He wrote widely,
from poetry of striking concreteness and metaphysical reach, to political
tracts against the introduction of atomic weapons in Provence. There he
lived until his death in 1988, meeting with friends such as Albert Camus,
Maurice Blanchot, Martin Heidegger, and Paul Veyne.

Char was born in the town of LIsle sur la Sorgue, near Avignon, in
southern France.   His early poetry developed a compressed, irreverent
style that explored contrasting themes, often of agony and love.  When Char
sent a copy of his youthful collection, Arsenal, to Paul Eluard, the older
poet responded by welcoming him into the surrealist group in Paris.
Between 1929 and 1934, Char wrote collaboratively while also composing his
longer collection, the Hammer without a Master (1934), and voicing
opposition to Franco in Spain, the Colonial Exposition, colonization of
Indochina, and the rise of Nazism.

When France declared war on Germany in 1939, Char was mobilized and fought
until the armistice, when he escaped to the town of Cereste (his surrealist
activities made him suspect) and established a network of resistance
fighters.  He rose to become an inspiring, clear-sighted commander,
eventually assisting in the Allied landing in Provence.  His defiant
silence during the war, followed by the post-war appearance of Leaves of
Hypnos (1946) and Fury and Mystery (1948), immediately made him one of
Frances most celebrated poets. Influenced by Friedrich Nietzsche and
Heraclitus as well as a number of literary and artistic figures, Chars
poetry of the period depicts nature, love, and lived history with trenchant
lucidity and existential insight. Contrasting images of darkness and light,
the monstrous presence of Hitlerian night and the renewal conveyed by
love, hope, and beauty, he writes near the end of his journal, Within our
darkness, there is not one space alone for Beauty.  The whole space is for
Beauty (Char 2010). His later work, published in collections such as The
Dawn Breakers (1947-49), The Word as Archipelago (1952-60), Innocence Lost
(1964-70), and In Praise of one Suspected (1988), moves through images of
his native landscape to revelatory encounters with love, to the tragic
fragility of human existence, and poetrys power to illuminate it.

List of Works:
            Char, R. (1983) Oeuvres completes, Paris, Gallimard.
            Char, R. (1956) Hypnos Waking, Selected and Translated by
Jackson                Mathews, New York, Random House.
            Char, R.  (2004) This Smoke that Carried Us, Translated by
Susanne                Dubroff, introduced by Christopher Merrill, Buffalo,
White Plains Press
            Char, R. (2010) Furor and Mystery,Translated by Mary Ann Caws
and              Nancy Kline, introduced by Sandra Bermann and prefaced by
Marie-                 Claude Char, Boston, Black Widow Press.
                        Char, R. (2012) The Word as Archipelago, Translated
by Robert Baker,                  Richmond, California, Omnidawn
Publishing.
                        .

Further Reading:
                 Caws, M. A. (1976) The Presence of Rene Char, Princeton,
Princeton              University Press.
                        Greilsamer, L. (2004) Lclair au front: La  vie de
Rene Char, Paris,                 Fayard
            Lawler, J. (1978). Rene Char: the Myth and the Poem, Princeton,
                       Princeton University Press.
                 Marty, E. (1990), Rene Char, Paris, Seuil.
                       Veyne, P. (1990), Rene Char en ses poemes, Paris,
Gallimard.
