
Author: Atta Kwami
The Akwapim Six

Modern African visual practice did not begin as an imposition from Europe,
but rather because African women and men chose to master new technologies
and media, beginning with photography from the 1850s, and turn them into
practices of local relevance within the evolving local modernities of the
continent. The formation of the Akwapim Six in Ghania pre-dated the better-
known Zaria rebels (The Zaria Art Society) by a decade. Like the latter
group, it advocated a synthesis of the new techniques acquired through
modern art education, and rich local resources in Africa. Moreover, The
Akwapim Six enacted some ideas of the South African migr H.V. Meyerowitz
(1900-1945), an influential artist and educator in the Gold Coast. The
group sought inspiration from tradition-based concepts such as Sankofa (a
return to the aesthetic principles and artistic values of the past),as
well as the  theme of a national art contest for seeking out new talent.
Sankofa was used as a strategy by Ghanaian artists as a way of underlining
a history of their ownmodernity. Founder and artist of the Akwapim six
society, Oku Ampofo, argued against a Ghanaian adoption of Western
naturalism: Just as the rhythm of African music is totally different from
that of the West, so too is the plastic rhythm of African art [...].


The Akwapim Six was the first Ghanaian modern art society to engage local
art traditions andtechniques with styles and genres from Europe. Oku
Ampofo (1908-1998) wrote of the achievement and promise of his
contemporaries whose works were exhibited in 1945 in Ghana and in England
in 1949. Ampofos preference was for a free and natural style. Writing
in 1991 Ampofo [...] felt that creative art in Ghana was as important as
political freedom and the two should go together to establish Ghanaian
identity. Thus the ideology of the group was established.

The original six members comprised of Oku Ampofo, sculptor; F.A. Gyampo,
painter-sculptor; J.D. Okae, painter / illustrator; E.O. Asare, weaver;
John Christopher Osei Okyere, sculptor-painter; John Cobblah, ceramicist.
Others members included: Adi Darko, ceramicist; Emmanuel Owusu Dartey,
painter; Alex Ofei-Aboagye, sculptor; Charles Philips, painter; Comfort
Anno-Nyako, textile artist and Teddy Awuah, painter. Associate members
included: Prof. E.V. Asihene, painter-sculptor, Christopher K. Agbolosu,
sculptor / textile artist; Ekow Bentil, painter; Richard A. Charway,
graphic artist, calligrapher / book designer / book art designer. The group
held annual exhibitions in Accra but since the 1980s has ceased to exist.

 Notable members included: J.C. Okyere (b. 1912), appointed headmaster of
Twifu-Praso Teacher Training College in 1965, received his training in art
in Ghana and in Britain; A. O. Bartimeus (1927-1988) studied at the Kumasi
College of Technology, Science and Arts, among the second intake of
students. Bartimeuss work uses a technique similar to the Impressionists,
a technique which replaces outline and chiaroscuro by patterns of colour,
designed to convey the diffusion of light. Bartimeuss landscapes and
figurative compositions reveal a strength in colour, applied with the use
of impasto. Themes based on market scenes, durbars and local festivals were
characteristic of Bartimeuss repertoire.

Despite holding thepost of Managing Director of Ghana Tourist Board in
Accra (1972-1986), Bartimeus continued to exhibit both nationally and
internationally. Christopher Agbolosu (b. 1940), who studied with Ampofo
(1961-1964), worked as a textile designer for Patterson Zochonis Ghana Ltd.
Agbolosu was involved as a sculptor with the Ghana Institute of Art and
Culture, winning first prize for Mother and Child. This image was used for
the statutory currency note Five Cedis in 1979. It was also reproduced in
Sculpture in Ghana by Vincent Kofi. (1964: ); Agbolosu was also a senior
designer at Freedom Textiles Ghana Ltd.

Of varied educational backgrounds, the diverse media and techniques of
production its protagonists ranged from painting, textiles, sculpture,
pottery and illustration. Akwapim Six embodied tradition and modernity.
J.C. Okyere, A. O. Bartimeus, Ampofo and associate members, E. V. Asihene
and Christopher Agbolosu drew strength from the act of creation related to
modern forms of representation, and the ancestral carvings in wood, drawing
and painting traditions of Ghanaian art. While the sources of inspiration
were profoundly Ghanaian, both in subject matter, spirit and the techniques
employed were not unfamiliar to Westerners. ;

Oku Ampofo, founder of The Akwapim Six, became the president of the Ghana
Institute of Art and Culture in 1961 and later, Chairman of the Arts
Council of Ghana (1969-72). Clearly, Ampofo took advantage of his position
as Chairman of the Arts Council of Ghana to promote The Akwapim Six through
its annual exhibitions.Much of of H.V. Meyerowitzs philosophy was adapted
and disseminated by Ampofo. For example: to convince students that they
have an African viewpoint to express and to share with the rest of the
world; to re-awaken in the students the natural gift for designs and the
creation of patterns to fill various spaces and shapes; Picasso and others
have been inspired to explore a new outlook in painting by African
sculptures, why shouldnt the African seek to express his culture and other
ideas or imagery in the painting media at the easel.

  The most important aspect of Ampofos work with the group, inspired by
Meyerowitzs example, was to embark on nationwide tours offering lecture
demonstrations in schools and colleges,

References and further reading

Brown, Evelyn, S. 1966. Africa's Contemporary Art and Artist's: a review of
creative activities in painting, sculpture, ceramics and crafts of over 300
artists working in the modern industrialized societies of some of the
countries of sub-Saharan Africa, New York: Division of Social Research and
Experimentation, Harmon Foundation.

July, Robert. 1987. An African Voice: The Role of the Humanities in African
Independence, Duke University Press, Durham.

Picton John. 2005. Made in Africa. In Africa Remix: Contemporary Art of a
Continent, London: Hayward Gallery, South Bank Centre, 10 February  17
April 2005. [Exh. Cat.]

Kwami, Atta. 2013. Kumasi Realism, 19512007: An African Modernism, Hurst &
Company, London.


Illustrations


[pic]

Albert Osabu Bartimeus, Watching the Flock, 1976,

Ghanaian, 1927-1988

oil on board

61.5 x 76.3 cm.

National Art Gallery, Accra





[pic]Christopher Agbolosu,Daughter of the Earth, c. 1970.

Ghanaian,b. 1940

teak

82.8 x 25.3 x 76.2 cm
Centre for National Culture, Greater Accra Region, Accra
Photograph courtesy of the Artist.




[pic]Christopher Agbolosu,Mother and Child, 2008.

Ghanaian,b. 1940

teak

100 x 53 x 22 cm. (Diameter).

Collection of Atta Kwami and Pamela Clarkson

Photographed by Atta Kwami 2014.







[pic]John Christopher Osei Okyere,Adoration, c. 1968.

Ghanaian,

Ebony

Collection of National Art Gallery, Accra

Courtesy of Cultural Heritage, (1968), Accra: Arts Council of Ghana and
Mobil Oil of Ghana Limited. [Exh. Cat.]









