
City Films

Juan A. Surez (University of Murcia, Spain)

City films or city symphonies are labels applied to experimental films
devoted to the depiction of city life. They are perhaps the most prevalent
experimental film sub-genre in the first half of the twentieth century, but
are not confined to this temporal frame; a considerable number of
filmmakers still work in this mode. City films are usually devoid of
narrative or of individualized characters. They focus on the anonymous
metropolitan crowd and on the urban physical environment: buildings,
streets, infrastructures, and means of mass transport  subways, elevated
trains, and cars. City films are at the crossroads of a number of modernist
interests: the machine aesthetic, the cult of dynamism and speed, the
interest in exploring shapes and textures of contemporary life, and the
perception of the city as an emblematic modern environment. Canonical
representatives of the genre are the European titles Rien que les heures
(Cavalcanti 1926), Berlin: Symphony of a Great City (1927) and Man with the
Movie Camera (Dziga Vertov 1929). City films evince the close association
between the cinema and the modern city  not only the main setting for the
production and consumption of the cinema, but also, as far back as the
Lumire brothers films, one of the cameras favorite spectacles.

Origins and antecedents

The city film arises from a fascination with the spectacle of the modern
metropolis. Its immediate antecedents are artistic developments of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century that also shared this interest:
Impressionist painting, with its capture of fleeting city views; the
straight urban photography of Alfred Stieglitz and Eugne Atget; and the
early film genre known as urban actualities. Urban actualities portrayed
slices of city life, usually in single takes. Some were random shots of
traffic and crowds, or of found  or, at times, staged  scenes intended to
look spontaneous; others portrayed the citys monumental faade, as does
Panorama of the Flatiron Building (1903) or the numerous films of the
Brooklyn Bridge and the high-rises of Lower Manhattan often filmed from
moving boats. Due to the influence of this popular genre, some early city
films seem at first sight to be collections of actualities, though more
artfully filmed and edited.

Aesthetics

City films gave cinematic shape to what German critic Walter Benjamin
famously described as a prime modern experience: the drift of the flanur,
or aimless wanderer, across the metropolis, regarding the world around him
(the modern city stroller was usually male) with detached attention.
However, in city films the perceiving agent is not an individual, but the
camera. The recording mechanism is the surrogate of the spectator and the
device that organizes perception. Because of this mediation, city films
show a double fascination: with the wonders of city life and with the
capacity of the camera to capture and relay them. City films are examples
of what Tom Gunning famously named the cinema of attractions. They are
less interested in narrative than in showcasing enticing visual spectacles.
These include those that materialize more or less spontaneously in front of
the lens, but also exploit the ability of the apparatus to provide images
unavailable to the naked eye: frozen movement and fast motion, abrupt
abridgements of time and space, and jolting juxtapositions.

Because of this, city films are not only visual translations of strolls
through the city, but also exercises in non-human vision. Vertovs Man with
the Movie Camera shifts from the moving images taken from the streets in a
perspective that approaches that of the human eye, to those same images
being mediated through various technological supports during the films
production: run through a moviola, parsed out in separate frames on a strip
of celluloid, and cut and spliced by a film editor. Frequent
superimpositions and split screens further articulate views alien to
organic vision. Walter Ruttmanns Berlin (1927) opens with a sequence of
swish pans, rapid cuts, and blurred views that convey the speed of a train
journey into the city. This means of foregrounding the apparatus is not
exclusive to well-known titles in the genre. Robert Floreys Skyscraper
Symphonie (1929) distorts and multiplies the outlines of buildings by means
of prisms and makes them swing and dance through oscillating camera
movement. The relatively unknown Markt am Wittembergplatz (Wilhelm Basse
1928) used frame shooting to compress the entire day of a Berlin market
into a few minutes. For its ability to convey the frantic pace of
metropolitan life, frame shooting is also widely used in later examples of
the cycle such as Marie Menkens Go! Go! Go! (1964), Hilary Harriss
Organism (1975), and Godfrey Reggios Koyaanisqatsi (1982).

Other films foreground the workings of the apparatus more subtly. Joris
Ivens Regen [Rain, 1929] lyrically depicts how a sudden shower momentarily
disrupts the routine of a city. Beautifully framed shots show dripping
railings and trees; forests of umbrellas in the streets; and raindrops
impacting on a variety of surfaces, from puddles to window panes. The
apparatus here acts as a surgical device that extracts discrete views out
of a perceptual continuum. In all cases, by showcasing visual capabilities
only available to the cinema, city films not only participate in the
aesthetics of attraction and astonishment; they also turn their means of
expression into one of their main subjects, which, in critic Clement
Greenbergs famous formulation, was one of the characteristics of modernist
art.

Approaches and Types

City films may be divided on the basis of their approach to the city. Many
of the earliest ones showed a panoramic ambition to account with some
degree of wholeness for a particular setting (as was the case with Strand
and Sheelers Manhatta (1921) or Ruttmanns Berlin), or for the entirety of
the urban experience (as in Vertovs Man with the Movie Camera). Such
panoramic aspiration is enhanced by these films organization as single day-
long cycles in the life of a city, a natural unit that puts closure on the
exuberant, seemingly boundless activity that the films portray. Manhatta,
Berlin, and Man with the Movie Camera use this strategy, as do later
examples such as Marie Menkens Go! Go! Go!, Hilary Harriss Organism
(1975), or, more recently, Fernando Prezs Havana Suite (2003).

Most titles in the genre, however, forego such encyclopedic ambition and
focus instead on particular aspects of city life. Jean Vigos A Props de
Nice (1930) concentrates on the mixture of wealth and crassness found in
Nices elegant seafront, and ends up contrasting the vitality of the young
revelers in a carnival parade with the bland stolidity of older bourgeois
watching from the sidelines. In Ivens De Brug [The Bridge, 1928] the city
is an almost incidental backdrop to the transit and activity around a
Rotterdam steel bridge. These examples notwithstanding, early city films
tended to aim for completeness and to use the daytime as a framing device,
while titles made after World War II tended to take partial views of their
subjects and to blur temporal markers.

Another distinction may be drawn between films that present the city as a
sight to be consumed visually and those that present the city as a setting
for various types of actions that go, at times, against habit or collective
sanction. This distinction may be read against the evolution of the genre.
While early films presented the city as a spectacle, films after World War
II tended to see it as a stage for activity that leads at times to the re-
enchantment of everyday spaces and situations. Significant examples of this
mode are Helen Levitt and James Agees In the Street (1948, 1953) Joseph
Cornells What Mozart Saw on Mulberry Street (1956), and Shirley Clarkes
In Paris Parks (1954); they all concentrate on the spontaneous choreography
of childrens games and gestures and on the transformative effect that
these have on their surroundings. The late-1950s collaborations of Jack
Smith and Ken Jacobs (The Whirled, Star-Spangled to Death) and Jack Smiths
Scotch Tape (1963) also belong in this category. In Smiths and Jacobss
films, it is not children, but a band of outcasts that turn the city into
their own particular playground; their games are a hysterical way of acting
out their alienation from an oppressive, dehumanizing environment.

Two less frequent modes are the lyrical and the essayistic city film. In
lyrical approaches, the documentary quality of the city film yields to the
personal expression of the filmmaker. Two paradigmatic examples come from
Stan Brakhage. The Wonder Ring (1955) is a film of a trip on New Yorks
Third Avenue Elevated train filmed at Joseph Cornells request and often co-
credited to both artists. Brakhages later Unconscious London Strata (1982)
is a highly abstract recreation of London that amplifies the elusive
resonances the city raised in the filmmaker. In both titles, especially in
the latter, the materiality of the city volatilizes somewhat, as it becomes
a catalyst for highly individual perceptions and associations.

Quite different in rhetoric are argument-driven, essayistic films such as
Ralph Steiner and Willard Van Dykes The City (1939) or Arthur Elton and
Edgard Ansteys Housing Problems (1935). The City, written by Lewis Mumford
and sponsored by the American Institute of Planners, is a plea for the
abandonment of the cramped inner city in favor of the suburban sprawl,
still seen as a post-urban utopia when the film was made. While The City
attacks the crowded, mechanical quality of the traditional city, it
unwittingly portrays its warmth and unconscious beauty, lovingly
photographed by Steiner. Similar in intent to The City, Housing Problems is
a matter-of-fact depiction of the unsanitary British slums and a plea for
their clearance and replacement. Detached voice-over commentary and
harrowing on-camera testimonies by slum-dwellers, together with images that
set the derelict slums against the luminous, spacious housing built in
their place, drive the point home forcefully. Some films bring together the
lyrical-poetic and the essayistic. Chris Marker Le Joli mai (1963), is both
a document of a city in transition and a poetic meditation on the paradoxes
of everyday life in the modern world. It shows Paris in May of 1962,
shortly after the colonial conflict of the Algerian war came to an end. An
era of peace is beginning. The new peace, however, is not entirely void of
confrontation and malaise; concomitantly, the new consumerism that replaces
the austerity of the post-war years turns out to be as exhilarating as it
is banal and ultimately dispiriting. The Parisian urban layout changes in
tandem with these transformations: from the concentrated inner city to the
dispersed habitat of the outskirts, dotted with new high-rise apartments
promising unprecedented comfort but delivering, at the same time,
impersonality and isolation.

In the same way that lyricism and argument occasionally blend, so does
fiction impregnate at times the essentially documentary quality of the city
film. An early example is Alfredo Cavalcantis Rien que les heures (1926):
it revolves around a prostitute and a newspaper seller whose passage
through the city allows the film to delve into the Parisian underworld.
Other films that employ some sort of narrative device and focus on distinct
characters are Alfred Leslies whimsical The Last Clean Shirt (1964) and
Chantal Akermans News from Home (1977), both set in New York City. In
Leslies film, made up of a single shot, an interracial couple drives
through Manhattan; the camera frames them from behind and the city courses
by in a blur. While the white woman soliloquizes endlessly, verging at
times on complete nonsense, the black man just drives and offers no
response. News From Home shows long takes of New York streets and subways,
with a particular emphasis on de-industrialized, deserted Lower Manhattan;
meanwhile, present only as an off-screen voice, a Belgian mother reads
fragments of her letters to her daughter, a visual artist living in New
York at the time.

For its fascination with the city as visual spectacle and as a stage for a
varied range of activities and styles of habitation, and for its
exploration of the possibilities of the apparatus, the city film is an
essentially modernist form. Its currency during modernisms historical
period and its contemporary persistence (in the work, among others of
Fernando Prez, Dominique Gonzlez-Foester, and Chris Marker, whose Chats
perches, 2004, may be seen as an avatar of the genre) indicate that the
form is as inexhaustible, and as amenable to transformation and evolution
as the modern city that inspired it.

Selected Filmography (in chronological order)

Rien que les heures (A. Cavalcanti, 1926), 42 mins., si., b&w, 35mm
Berlin: Symphony of a Great City (W. Ruttmann, 1927), 65 mins., si., b&w,
35mm
The Bridge (J. Ivens, 1928), 11 mins, si., b&w, 35mm
Rain (J. Ivens and M. Franken, 1929), 14 mins, si., b&w, 35mm
Man with the Movie Camera (D. Vertov, 1929), 68min., si., b&w, 35mm
Skycraper Symphonie (R. Florey, 1929), 9 mins., si., b&w, 35mm
A Props de Nice (J. Vigo, 1930), 22 mins, si., b&w, 35mm
Housing Problems (E. Anstey and A. Elton, 1935), 16 mins., so., b&w, 35mm
The City (R. Steiner and W. Van Dyke, 1939), 43 mins., so., b&w, 35mm
In the Street (H. Levitt and J. Agee, 1948), 16 mins, so., b&w, 35mm
In Paris Parks (S. Clarke, 1954), 13 mins, si., b&w, 35mm
The Wonder Ring (S. Brakhage and J. Cornell, 1955), 6 mins, si., col.,16mm
What Mozart Saw on Mulberry Street (J. Cornell and R. Burckhardt, 1956), 6
mins, si., b&w, 16mm
The Whirled (K. Jacobs, 1956-63), 19 mins, so., col., 16mm
Scotch Tape (J. Smith, 1963), 3 mins, si., col., 35mm
Le Joli mai (C. Marker and P. Lhomme, 1963), 165 mins., so., b&w, 35mm
The Last Clean Shirt (A. Leslie, 1964), 39 mins., so., b&w, 16 mm
Go! Go! Go! (M. Menken, 1964), 12 mins, si., col., 16mm
Organism (H. Harris, 1975), 19 mins, so., col., 35mm
Letters Home (C. Akerman, 1977), 104 mins., so., col.,35mm
Unconscious London Strata (S. Brakhage, 1981), 22 mins, si., col., 16mm
Koyaanisqatsi (G. Reggio, 1982), 86 mins, so., col., 35mm
Powaqqatsi (G. Reggio, 1988), 99 mins, so., col., 35mm
Havana Suite (F. Prez, 2003), 84 mins, so., col., 35mm
Chats perches (C. Marker, 2004), 59 mins., so., col., 35mm
Star-Spangled to Death (K. Jacobs, 1955-1964, 2004), 402 mins, so., col.,
35mm

Bibliography and Further References

Chapman, J. (1971) Two Aspects of the City: Cavalcanti and Ruttmann, The
Documentary Tradition, (ed.) L. Jacobs. New York: Norton, 37-42.

Macdonald, S. (1997-98) The City as the Country: The New York City
Symphony from Rudy Burckhardt to Spike Lee, Film Quarterly 52(2): 2-20.

-----. (1997) The City as Motion Picture: Notes on Some California City
Films, Wide Angle 19(4): 109-130.

Surez, J. A. (2007) Reading the Modern City: Paul Strand and Charles
Sheelers Mannhatta, Pop Modernism: Noise and the Reinvention of the
Everyday. Chicago and Urbana: Illinois University Press, 50-29.

Uricchio, W. (1996) The City Viewed: The Films of Leyda, Browning, and
Weinberg, Lovers of the Cinema: The First American Film Avant-Garde 1919-
1945, (ed) J.-C. Horak. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 287-314.

