

The idea of musical modernism in the Latin American classical music world was a particular aesthetically-oriented instance of a broader discourse that has been described as ‘modernist capitalist-cosmopolitan’. The general modernist discourse was centered on the binary opposition modern/traditional that naturalizes a particular notion of temporal condition with a value judgment—that which is ‘modern’ is new, recent, and more efficient, against that which is ‘traditional’ which is old, has been passed on, and is less efficient. By 1918, at the end of the Great War, the prevalent ideology of 'progress' that was naturalized throughout industrialization in the 19th century had suffered its first major drawback. If society was progressing, how was it that Europe ended in such a wide and costly war? What was the place  for artists in such conditions? Composers as diverse as Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Skryabin, and Busoni became associated with the notion of modernism. Self-proclaimed futurist artists in Italy during the 1910s like Luigi Russolo and Francesco Balilla Pratella, advocated for a music that incorporated the sounds of the industries and the ‘modem’ city. By localizing artistic production in the urban setting against the rural soundscapes, the concept of the ‘modern’ captured also space, making the rural to be associated with the idea of ‘traditional’. A final key aspect of this discursive construction of the ‘modern’ was the way in which it represented a paradigmatic shift from 19th century discourses that divided the world into ‘civilized’ and ‘primitive’ practices.

The idea of musical modernism in the Latin American classical music world was a particular aesthetically-oriented instance of a broader discourse that has been described as ‘modernist capitalist-cosmopolitan’. The general modernist discourse was centered on the binary opposition modern/traditional that naturalizes a particular notion of temporal condition with a value judgment—that which is ‘modern’ is new, recent, and more efficient, against that which is ‘traditional’ which is old, has been passed on, and is less efficient. By 1918, at the end of the Great War, the prevalent ideology of ‘progress’ that was naturalized throughout industrialization in the 19th century had suffered its first major drawback. If society was progressing, how was it that Europe ended in such a wide and costly war? What was the place for artists in such conditions? Composers as diverse as Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Skryabin, and Busoni became associated with the notion of modernism. Self-proclaimed futurist artists in Italy during the 1910s like Luigi Russolo and Francesco Balilla Pratella, advocated for a music that incorporated the sounds of the industries and the ‘modem’ city. By localizing artistic production in the urban setting against the rural soundscapes, the concept of the ‘modern’ captured also space, making the rural to be associated with the idea of ‘traditional’. A final key aspect of this discursive construction of the ‘modern’ was the way in which it represented a paradigmatic shift from 19th century discourses that divided the world into ‘civilized’ and ‘primitive’ practices. Slowly, activities, situations, soundscapes, and habits that used to be categorized as ‘civilized’ became relabeled as ‘modern’. An aspect that became emphasized over and over as the discourse of modernity took hold of the arts, was the idea of innovation. The composer was an inventor of new things, a maverick breaking ground that others, attached to ‘tradition’ could not break. Who did what first became a matter of prestige in the field. Who wrote the first solo percussion piece? Was it Edgard Varèse (France 1883-1965) with his Ionisation from 1929-31, or was it the Cuban Amadeo Roldán (1900-1939) with his Rítmicas V and VI (1930)? Was Juan Carlos Paz (Argentina, 1901-1972) the first Latin American composer to apply the 12-tone theories of Schoenberg? The anxiety of many composers to appear 'more modem' early on in their careers, as has been shown for example of Henry Cowell and Charles Ives, was associated with the idea of being there first, a notion that would grow stronger and stronger as the century advanced, and became epitomized in the larger socio-political climate in the race between the United States and the USSR to reach the moon.



A crucial part of the spread and adoption of musical modernist discourse and practices was the formation of professional organization that would promote so-called modern music. Among these were the International Composers Guild, which included composers like Acario Cotapos (1889-1969), a Chilean modernist, and the League of Composers, which featured in its concerts the music of Mexican composers Carlos Chavez (1899-1978) and Julian Carrillo (1875-1965). Most important was the short-lived Pan-American Association of Composers (1928-1934), founded by Varèse, and which included several composers from the U.S. like Ruggles, Cowell, Crawford, Harris and Ives and also Latin Americans like Cotapos, Eduardo Fabini (Uruguay, 1882-1950), Silvestre Revueltas (México, 1899-1940), and Amadeo Roldán. In each of their countries these Latin American composers were bearers of the modernist torch.



As Latin American composers became more immersed in the practices of modernism, two terms became frequently used in opposition: nationalism—which in its larger socio-political connotations was deeply rooted in the discourse of modernity—and universalism—usually associated with cosmopolitan desires for transnational parity. Within the rhetoric of modernism, nationalism was associated with conservative positions as it referenced ‘traditional’ music, while universalism was frequently seen as adherent to ‘modern’ musical practices. Ultimately, both musical nationalism and universalism reflected expectations, concerns, and desires emerging from the same broader modernist discourse, and they both shared similarities in terms of aesthetical choices, to the point that composers found themselves fluctuating between them, even if large part of the historiography of Latin American music for the 20th century has attempted to mark them as opposite aesthetic factions. 



The search for identity in Latin American classical music was often related to nationalistic projects. The general discourse of nationalism in the region went through significant changes during the early years of the 20th century. During the 19th century, nationalist discourse had almost completely excluded the masses and focused on a select elite and on the economically active oligarchies that identified primarily with their European heritage. The objective of this first nationalism was to create a viable nation both economically and militarily after the years of independence. Latin American peasants, the indigenous population, black population, and the lower classes in general and their cultural practices in particular, were mostly ostracized and marginalized by those interested in nation-building. However, by the turn of the 20th century, the need to expand the internal markets of consumption and augment the investment in the idea of nationhood by the peasants and working class led to a renewed political interest in significant portions of the population that had previously been ignored. Musical nationalism manifested itself in different ways across a wealth of traditions, including the classical art world. Initially, it meant the recognition of that which was not part of the European heritage in the Latin American context and a search for a usable past to construct a shared national identity. With more or less degrees of success, composers started using music from those social groups that had been neglected in the past. Practices that they labeled and imagined as folkloric, popular, or traditional became inspiration and direct source of musical materials to be referenced in compositions, creating a bridge to an imagined soundscape of the indigenous, the rural, and the traditions brought through slavery from multiple regions in Sub-Saharan Africa. 



Adopting nationalism within an art music composition in Latin America, almost by definition involved the inclusion of vernacular references of some sort within it. The way this was approached varied tremendously, from those who studied thoroughly the musical practices that they were referencing, without pretensions, and with awareness of the ethical connotations of their acts to those who used these sources indiscriminately, creating musical postcards from exotic places. As composers believed in the ideas promulgated by nationalism, they saw the music being made in their geographical proximity as theirs, ignoring the disparity in power between them and those being referenced, and effectively ignoring the evident difference between the marginalized and those representing them.



At least since the 1930s, several intellectuals and artists started to problematize musical nationalism within art music, especially as it became increasingly associated with the broader socio-historical context of nationalist-populist movements connected to fascism. The flag of universalism was frequently waived in opposition to nationalism—albeit their shared modernist anxieties, and despite having multiple composers that would participate of both. Artists that looked to be ‘universal’ in their music, were frequently aware of the latest tendencies of musical creation at a transnational level, adhered to recent and novel developments in compositional procedures, and often, but not always, avoided references to musical traditions outside the classical music world. There was an interest in participating in a dialogue with the musical languages emanating from Paris, Vienna, New York, Buenos Aires, or any other cultural center of the thoroughly cosmopolitan world of classical music, in order to achieve parity with those centers, usually under the banner of musical modernism. In essence what was being shared with those metropolitan centers was technology: the techniques of making art, technology for artistic creation, be it serialism, spectral techniques or machines that enabled electroacoustic music composition. Just like with nationalism, the way in which composers participated from transnational musical practices varied significantly. For some, the belief in the neutrality of certain compositional procedures—12-tone composition, serialism, electroacoustic techniques—blinded them to their ideological charge, and the Euro-centric aesthetic values that they carry. For others, these same procedures under a critical view allowed for a subversive and conscientious appropriation of musical elements.



Contrasting with the very specific use of the term modernism in literature, visual arts, or even film music, the general use of the word modernism in classical music seems to imply the vast majority of the 20th century and to cover a broad array of musical styles. Although there is a peak in the interest on modernism during the 1910s and 1920s, and then during the decades following Word War II, the values of modernism shaped an important segment of artistic production in Latin America during the whole century. With nationalism and universalism at the center of the narratives on musical modernism, and especially with the way in which it has been described in the majority of historiography of Latin American classical music, these appear to be irreconcilable aesthetic positions. But, as suggested earlier, this in practice was simply not true, as composers fluctuated frequently, sometimes even within one piece, from emphasizing nationalist and universalist values. In the end, what was being constructed and reflected by the embrace of musical modernism in Latin America, were the anxieties and concerns of people fully embracing the very cosmopolitan discourse of modernity in a very localized manner.



See also (by country):



Argentina



Agrupación Nueva Música

Arias, Luis

Bazán, Oscar

Castro, Juan José

Davidovsky, Mario

Di Tella, Institute

Dianda, Hilda

Etkin, Mariano

Gandini, Gerardo

García Morillo, Roberto

Ginastera, Alberto

Grupo Renovación

Kreiger, Armando

Kröpfl, Francisco

Kusnir, Eduardo

Osvaldo Budón

Paz, Juan Carlos

Serra, Luis María

Tauriello, Antonio

Valverde, Gabriel

Villanueva, Maria Cecilia

Zubillaga, Luis

Kagel, Mauricio

Bértola, Eduardo

lanza, alcides

Roqué Alsina, Carlos

Graetzer, Guillermo

Paraskevaídis, Graciela



Bolivia

Prudencio, Cergio

Villalpando, Alberto



Brazil

1922 Modern Art Week (São Paulo)

Antunes, Jorge

Cardoso, Lindembergue

Cerqueira, Fernando

Corrêa de Oliveira, Willy

Duprat, Rogério

Grupo de compositores da Bahia

Grupo Música Nova

Grupo Música Viva

Guerra Peixe, César

Katunda, Eunice

Krieger, Edino

Koellreutter, Hans-Joachim



Mello, Chico

Mendes, Gilberto

Nobre, Marlos

Rescala, Tim

Santoro, Claudio

Scliar, Esther

Taborda, Tato

Villa-Lobos, Heitor

Widmer, Ernst



Chile

Aguilar, Miguel

Amenábar, Juan

Asuar, José Vicente

Cáceres, Eduardo

Cotapos, Acario

García, Fernando

Isamitt, Carlos

Orrego-Salas, Juan

Santacruz, Domingo

Becerra-Schmidt, Gustavo



Colombia

Atehortúa, Blas Emilio

González Zuleta, Fabio

Nova, Jacqueline

Pineda-Duque, Roberto

Pinzón Urrea, Jesús

Posada, Andrés

Rendón, Guillermo

Uribe Holguín, Guillermo

Valencia, Antonio María

Zumaqué, Francisco



Costa Rica

Cardona, Alejandro

Flores, Bernal

Gutierrez, Benjamín

Mora, Eddie



Cuba

Afrocubanismo

Amadeo Roldán

Brouwer, Leo

García-Caturla, Alejandro

Gramatges, Harold

Grupo de Renovación Musical

Blanco, Juan



Ecuador

Luzuriaga, Diego

Maiguashca, Mesias



Guatemala

Gandarias, Igor

Orellana, Joaquín

Sarmientos, Jorge



Mexico

Carrillo, Julián

Chávez, Carlos

Enriquez, Manuel

Estrada, Julio

Ibarra Groth, Federico

Lavista, Mario

Ortiz, Gabriela

Quintanar, Héctor

Revueltas, Silvestre

Grupo de los Cuatro

Kuri-Aldana, Mario

Ponce, Manuel María



Panama

Cordero, Roque



Paraguay

Barrios, Agustin [a.k.a. Nitsuga Mangoré]

Szarán, Luis



Peru

Garrido-Lecca, Celso

Valcárcel, Edgar

Bolaños, Cesar

Iturriaga, Enrique

Sas, Andrés

Tello, Aurelio



Puerto Rico

Ortiz, William

Sierra, Roberto



Uruguay

Aharonián, Coriún

Barradas, Carmen

Biriotti, León

Condon, Fernando

Fabini, Eduardo

Legrand, Diego

Mastrogiovanni, Antonio

Tosar, Héctor



Venezuela

Arismendi, Diana

Del Mónaco, Alfredo

Estévez, Antonio

Izarra, Adina

Plaza, Juan Bautista

Rugeles, Alfredo

Sojo, Vicente Emilio



Others:

Film Music and Modernism in Latin America

Nationalism

Pan-Americanism

Universalism (Latin America)



Further reading:



(Aharonián)



(Anderson)



(Appadurai)



(Van Wyck)



(Burkholder)



(Béhague)



(Béhague, Music in Latin America: An Introduction)



(Corrado)



(Gidal)



(Hess)



(Hicks)



(Lang)



(Madrid)



(Orrego-Salas)



(Root)



(Taruskin)



(Turino) 





[Enter citations for further reading here]