

Sydney Clouts was perhaps the most modernist South African poet of his generation. Though his published oeuvre remained small, including a single published volume, One Life (1966), he was highly regarded in poetic circles; he won both the Ingrid Jonker and Olive Schreiner prizes for poetry in 1968. He lived largely in Cape Town, whose natural environs fundamentally inspired him; a permanent move to England in 1961 radically diminished his capacity to produce and complete new poems. Though his more accessible poems, such as ‘Dawn Hippo’ and ‘Hotknife’ – adopting a Cape Coloured patois – are regularly anthologised, his work became increasingly lapidary, almost aphoristic, and elusive of meaning. Because most often he wrote sensually of the particulate natural world – birds, sea, rocks, pools, trees being common emblematic elements – he was accused of being both apolitical and too Romantic. He was more deeply informed, however, by modernists such as Wallace Stevens and Eugenio Montale; he said he ‘wanted to write like Mondrian’.  His finest poems, such as ‘Residuum’ and ‘Dew on a Shrub’, consist of spacious single-line statements of high metaphoric density, constructions analogous to Cubism. Throughout his career he strove to weld his essentially European sensibility to southern African landscapes and realities.

Sydney Clouts was perhaps the most modernist South African poet of his generation. Though his published oeuvre remained small, including a single published volume, One Life (1966), he was highly regarded in poetic circles; he won both the Ingrid Jonker and Olive Schreiner prizes for poetry in 1968. He lived largely in Cape Town, whose natural environs fundamentally inspired him; a permanent move to England in 1961 radically diminished his capacity to produce and complete new poems. Though his more accessible poems, such as ‘Dawn Hippo’ and ‘Hotknife’ – adopting a Cape Coloured patois – are regularly anthologised, his work became increasingly lapidary, almost aphoristic, and elusive of meaning. Because most often he wrote sensually of the particulate natural world – birds, sea, rocks, pools, trees being common emblematic elements – he was accused of being both apolitical and too Romantic. He was more deeply informed, however, by modernists such as Wallace Stevens and Eugenio Montale; he said he ‘wanted to write like Mondrian’.  His finest poems, such as ‘Residuum’ and ‘Dew on a Shrub’, consist of spacious single-line statements of high metaphoric density, constructions analogous to Cubism. Throughout his career he strove to weld his essentially European sensibility to southern African landscapes and realities.



List of Works

One Life (1966)

Collected Poems, edited by Cyril and Marjorie Clouts (1982). Cape Town: David Philip.

Further reading:

 (Sydney Clouts special issue)

(Goddard)

(Watson)

(Wylie)