

Ornette Coleman is an American jazz alto saxophonist and composer. Coleman is considered one of the founders of the avant-garde movement in jazz, which he began performing and recording in the late 1950s. The saxophonist won the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2007, awarded on the basis of his album Sound Grammar. Coleman became known in avant-garde jazz for leading a piano-less quartet of musicians on alto saxophone, as first documented on his 1959 album Tomorrow Is The Question!: The New Music of Ornette Coleman. Later that year, he signed a contract with Atlantic Records, who first released his new jazz album The Shape of Jazz to Come. Coleman pioneered a style of avant-garde music known as Free Jazz, or music that rested completely on free improvisation in collective settings distinct to modern jazz ensemble instrumentation. This was first documented in full on the self-titled release Free Jazz: A Collective Improvisation by the Ornette Coleman Double Quartet (1961), one that featured a print of a painting by Jackson Pollock as album art. Coleman has received high praise from major musicians, musical thinkers and figures outside of the jazz tradition, most notably Leonard Bernstein and Virgil Thomson.  

Ornette Coleman is an American jazz alto saxophonist and composer. Coleman is considered one of the founders of the avant-garde movement in jazz, which he began performing and recording in the late 1950s. The saxophonist won the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2007, awarded on the basis of his album Sound Grammar. Coleman became known in avant-garde jazz for leading a piano-less quartet of musicians on alto saxophone, as first documented on his 1959 album Tomorrow Is The Question!: The New Music of Ornette Coleman. Later that year, he signed a contract with Atlantic Records, who first released his new jazz album The Shape of Jazz to Come. Coleman pioneered a style of avant-garde music known as Free Jazz, or music that rested completely on free improvisation in collective settings distinct to modern jazz ensemble instrumentation. This was first documented in full on the self-titled release Free Jazz: A Collective Improvisation by the Ornette Coleman Double Quartet (1961), one that featured a print of a painting by Jackson Pollock as album art. Coleman has received high praise from major musicians, musical thinkers and figures outside of the jazz tradition, most notably Leonard Bernstein and Virgil Thomson.  



Ornette Coleman was born Randolph Denard Ornette Coleman on 9 March 1930 in Fort Worth, Texas. Coleman first received wide attention among notable and respected musicians in jazz in New York City with his extended engagement at the Five Spot Café in Greenwich Village in November 1959. The Five Spot Café was a venue that had previously given extended engagements to leading modernists in jazz such as pianist Thelonius Monk and his Quartet, featuring the tenor saxophonist John Coltrane in 1957. Like Monk and Coltrane, the music Coleman and his band premiered at the noted Greenwich Village establishment has also been considered ahead of its time by lead critics, music historians, listeners and musicians alike. In the 1960s, as the avant-garde movement in jazz had emerged in full, Coleman became one of the movement’s icons in the US and internationally. Coleman and his band began touring overseas to regions of Europe that had been very receptive to avant-garde and Free Jazz from its inception in the US, including Scandinavia. In Stockholm, Coleman’s performances were released as live albums by the American-based modern jazz label Blue Note records, namely the Two Volumes of At the Golden Circle (1965).  



Coleman incorporated strings in his compositions for live performance in the 1960s and 1970s, as documented in his album-length composition Skies of America (1972), performed by the London Symphony Orchestra. His compositions have been adapted for performance and recording by younger generations of leaders in avant-garde music, most notably in other musical contexts and instrumentation. Such is the case of alto saxophonist John Zorn’s performance of Coleman’s compositions on the album Spy vs Spy (1989), which he recorded in a punk rock setting. Although he prefers to perform and record as a bandleader, Coleman has worked with recording artists from other genres, such as Lou Reed and Yoko Ono, on musical projects that have been released as their own. He has also performed with Jerry Garcia and Gunther Schuller.



Along with winning the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2007, he was awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award that year. The University of Michigan awarded Coleman an honorary doctorate in 2010 for his career contributions to modern music. His early career compositions such as ‘Lonely Woman,’ ‘Peace,’ and ‘Turnaround,’ all first recorded by him in 1959, have since become standards, performed and recorded by avant-garde and mainstream jazz artists alike. He recorded an album entirely on tenor saxophone, Ornette on Tenor (1962), while signed to Atlantic Records; however, rather than relying on tenor saxophone, Coleman more commonly preferred to perform on violin and trumpet when not playing alto saxophone in his avant-garde jazz dating from the 1960s. He composed music for the 1991 film adaptation of William S. Borroughs’s novel Naked Lunch. Coleman was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship in 1994.  

Further reading:

(Giddins and DeVeaux)



(Gioia)



(Jost)



(Lee)



(Litweiler)



(Mandel)



(Whitehead)