
Salma Khadra Jayyusi (1926 )

[summary]
Salma Khadra Jayyusi is an anthologist, translator, literary critic, and
poet of Palestinian origins. A writer and researcher in her own right, she
is better known for spearheading major projects aimed at introducing Arabic
culture, literature, and history to Western audiences. Via the Project of
Translation from Arabic (PROTA) and East-West Nexus programmes, she has
contributed to and helped to translate and edit dozens of novels, edited
collections and anthologies of Arabic poetry, short stories, novellas, and
scholarly articles.

[main text]
Poet, literary critic, anthologist, and translator Salma Khadra Jayyusi was
born in 1926 in the small Jordanian city of Salt and was raised in Akka in
northern Palestine (now Israel) and in Jerusalem, where she attended the
elite Schmidt's Girls College. Her father, Subhi al-Khadra, was a
Palestinian politician, lawyer and journalist who was subjected to internal
exile and imprisonment when Salma was a child; her mother was Lebanese.
Jayyusi is often described as having grown up in a household which honoured
and enjoyed both Eastern and Western culture and history, which perhaps led
her to study Arabic and English literature at the American University of
Beirut. Married soon after her graduation to a Jordanian diplomat, she
focused on raising her children within the peripatetic lifestyle of the
diplomatic service, and only fully devoted herself to her writing, editing
and translation work after they were grown.

Jayyusi's first collection of poetry,      (Return from
the Dreamy Fountain) was published in 1960, but she halted work on her
second volume as a response to the Six-Day War in 1967, and has published
very few of her own poems since. During the 1960s she also translated works
of literature and literary criticism by Louise Bogan, Archibald MacLeish
and Lawrence Durrell into Arabic. In the late 1960s, Jayyusi turned instead
to research, and to writing and translation in English, completing her PhD
in London in 1970. This led to her first publications in English, which
included her PhD research, published as Trends and Movements in Modern
Arabic Poetry in 1977. During the 1970s she taught at the universities of
Khartoum, Algiers, Constantine, and Utah. Salma Khadra Jayyusi has lived in
the USA since 1975, with links to the universities of Washington, Texas,
and Michigan.

Laying aside much of her teaching and research, she has focused the bulk of
her career since then on the work of disseminating and promoting Arabic and
Islamic culture in the West, with the aim of challenging cultural
misunderstanding and misrepresentation. PROTA has attempted to do this via
literary translation. The initial seeds for the project were sown in the
late 1970s when Jayyusi was invited to work on a major anthology of modern
Arabic literature for Columbia University Press. This initiative, funded by
the Iraqi Ministry of Information & Culture, eventually led to two
significant collections, Modern Arabic Poetry (1987) and The Literature of
Modern Arabia (1988).

PROTA itself was officially established in 1980, with the stated aim of
the dissemination of Arabic culture and literature abroad and with
Jayyusi as director. Although her work has obviously been driven by her
love of Arabic culture, she has also been trenchant in her criticism of
Arab governments and cultural institutions for their failure to support
contemporary literature, asking: How can our people, who are in a position
of responsibility and who can do something positive and substantial to
change the situation...how can they take silence and ignore what only
ignorant attitudes can ignore?[1] Commentators have also noted that a
campaigning spirit lies behind much of PROTA's work, rather than a pretence
at scholarly 'neutrality'.[2]

PROTA has been the driving force behind a number of anthologies, single-
author collections of short stories or poetry, novellas and novels, issued
by many different publishing houses in the USA and UK. The project's
subjects have included many of the most significant names in twentieth-
century Arabic literature, such as Emile Habibi, Ghassan Kanafani, Hanna
Mina and Nizar Qabbani. Jayyusi has written the introductions or forewords
to most of these, edited over thirty volumes, and had a hand in translating
many of them. From its early days as a small group of academics, PROTA has
grown into a loose network of scholars and translators, significant members
of which include Roger Allen and Naomi Shihab Nye. Allen and Jayyusi were
closely involved in the negotiations which led to Egyptian novelist Naguib
Mahfouz being awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1988.

Jayyusi's second major project, East-West Nexus (EWN), aimed to add
cultural studies to the literary translation work of PROTA. EWN-sponsored
publications have included The Legacy of Muslim Spain, an 1,100-page volume
which brought together forty-two contributors, and My Jerusalem, a
compendium of essays, reminiscences and poems which was partly the
outcome of a Fulbright Fellowship during which Jayyusi conducted research
amongst Palestinians living in Syria, Jordan, and the West Bank.


Selected Publications

Single-Authored

     - (al-auda min al-nab al-halim; Return from the
Dreamy Fountain), 1960
Trends and Movements in Modern Arabic Poetry. Leiden: Brill, 1977

Edited volumes

Modern Arabic Poetry: An Anthology. New York: Columbia University Press,
1987
The Literature of Modern Arabia. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press,
1988
Anthology of Modern Palestinian Literature. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1992
The Legacy of Muslim Spain. Leiden; New York: E. J. Brill, 1992
Modern Arabic Drama: An Anthology (with Roger Allen). Indiana University
Press, 1995
Short Arabic Plays: An Anthology. Interlink Books, New York, 2003
Jerusalem in Ancient History and Tradition (with Thomas L. Thompson).
London: T&T Clark, 2003
My Jerusalem: Essays, Reminiscences and Poems (with Zafar Ishaq Ansari).
Interlink Books, 2004
Modern Arabic Fiction: An Anthology. Columbia University Press, New York,
2005
Beyond the Dunes: An Anthology of Modern Saudi Literature (with Mansour al-
Hazimi, Ezzat Khattab), I.B.Tauris, 2006
Tales of Juha: Classic Arab Folk Humor. 2006. Translated by Matthew
Sorenson, Faisal Khadra and Christopher Tingley. Interlink
Human Rights in Arab Thought: Ethical Universalism and the Arab Tradition 
A Reader. I.B. Tauris, London & New York, 2008
The City in the Islamic World (with Renata Holod, Anttilio Petruccioli,
Andre Raymond), Leiden: Brill, 2008
Classical Arabic Stories: an Anthology. Columbia University Press, 2010

Translations

(with Trevor LeGassick, Arabic to English) The Secret life of Saeed: the
Pessoptimist by Emile Habibi, 2002
(English to Arabic)
Louise Bogan, 1951 Achievement in American Poetry, 1900-1950  as (1960)
     
Archibald MacLeish Poetry and Experience (1961) as (1962)  
Lawrence Durrell Justine (1957) and Balthazar (1958)  Arabic publication
dates unknown


Selected contributions to other volumes

The Durable Cause of Memory in Being Palestinian: Personal Reflections on
Palestinian Identity in the Diaspora (ed Yasir Suleiman), Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2016
The Sheltered Quarter: A Tale of a Boyhood in Mecca. Hamza Bogary (Author),
Salma Khadra Jayyusi (Editor), Jeremy Reed (Translator). University of
Texas Press, 1991
Fan of Swords. Muhammad al-Maghut (Author), Salma Khadra Jayyusi
(Introduction), May Jayyusi (Translator), Naomi Shihab Nye (Translator).
Boulder: Lynne Riener, 1991





Possible images/video

Lecture by Jayyusi in Jordan and English interpretation of it:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bV8e354P7j4
(from Boston University Librarian Diane D'Almeida's women writers project)

Standard image of Jayyusi to be found in many places on the web. Don't know
about copyright but the largest file seems to be here:
http://www.arabwomenwriters.com/images/stories/Salma_Jayyussi.jpg


[pic]

From Arabic online newspaper al-Iqtisadia (Economics)
http://www.aleqt.com/2012/02/20/article_628432.html
copyright page (in English) here: http://www.aleqt.com/page/view/copyright
-----------------------
[1]   Speech by Salma Khadra Jayyusi at The Jerusalem Fund, Washington DC,
June 2005 http://www.thejerusalemfund.org/ht/d/ContentDetails/i/2583
[2]   Richard van Leeuwen, Review of Anthology of Modern Palestinian
Literature by Salma Khadra Jayyusi. In Journal of Arabic Literature, Vol.
26, No. 3 (Oct., 1995), p.278

