
Mara Santi
dAnnunzio, Gabriele (18631938)
Gabriele dAnnunzio, Italian poet, novelist, short story writer,  dramatist,
journalist, essayist and scriptwriter, was a leading Italian author  in  the
late 19th and early 20th centuries. Since 1914, he  also  played  an  active
role in Italian politics and became a national war hero  and  ideologist  of
the nationalists. His nonconformist model of aesthetic life (life as a  work
of art), his successful literary career, his  political  engagement  in  the
Great War, and even his scandalous  affairs,  surrounded  his  life  with  a
legendary aura and contributed to  making  him  one  of  the  most  striking
personalities of the period in Italy, where he was and still is  called,  by
antonomasia, the Vate (the Bard).  Affirming  literatures  capability  of
influencing  life  style,  he  conditioned  Italian  language,  fashion  and
everyday life,  throughout  a  rhetorical-ideological  model,  of  which  he
himself was the living embodiment, the so called Dannunzianism. He  was  the
first writer since decades who found acceptance out  of  Italy,  and  who  a
writer of international acclaim and it has often been argued  that  he  lead
Italian culture out  of  its  provincialism  by  merging  the  international
innovative cultural  fin  de  sicle  tendencies,  such  as     naturalism,
aestheticism and, symbolism,  superomism,  first  historical  avant-garde  
with Italys national literary tradition and its Latin and old Greek  roots.

IIn  his  works  dAnnunzio  tried  to  offered  Italy  a  cultural   model,
innovatively  embedded  in  the  national  tradition  and  determining   the
development of national post-unitary identity.
In his late yearsNear the  end  of  his  life  dAnnunziohe  supervised  the
publication of his works  (1927-1936),  undertaken  by  the  Government  and
published in 49 volumes divided into four sections: poetry (Versi damore  e
di gloria), dramas (Tragedie, sogni,  misteri),  novels  and  short  stories
(Prose di romanzi) and heterogeneous  other  texts  (Prose  di  ricerca,  di
lotta,  di  comando,  di  conquista,  di   tormento,   dindovinamento,   di
rinnovamento,  di  celebrazione,  di  rivendicazione,  di  liberazione,   di
favole, di giochi,  di  baleni).  He  presented  Tthis  ultimate  collection
represents dAnnunziosas his literary legacy to the nNation, which is  also
given the heritage of received the Vittoriale degli  Italiani,  dAnnunzios
monumental auto-celebrative private house. Incredibly gifted, especially  as
a poet, he wrote absolute masterpieces such as: Il  piacere  (The  Child  of
Pleasure 1898) where he introduces the leitmotiv of the superiority  of  the
artist; Alcyone (1904), third book of the Laudi del  cielo  del  mare  della
terra e degli eroi (In  Praise  of  Sky,  Sea,  Earth,  and  Heroes),  which
represents his sensual perception of the world and the artists  attempt  to
communicate with the divine essence of nature; Notturno (Nocturne 1921)  the
anti-novel of dAnnunzios war (from its  beginning  to  Fiume).  His  whole
production evolves around the concept ofDAnnunzio believed that  literature
was the verbalization of the divine heart of nature and is based on an auto-
referential representation ofsaw the artist  as  the  living  expression  of
this nature. Although DdAnnunzio anticipates Italian modernism, yet  unlike
many modernist  writers  in  Italy  he  still  conceives  art  as  a  closed
epistemological system and postulates an  active  role  of  the  artist  who
rules and explains the world.
List of works:
dAnnunzio, G. (1927-1936), Tutte le opere di Gabriele  dAnnunzio,  Milano:
Mondadori.
References and further readings:
dAnnunio, G. (1996), Versi d'amore e di gloria; (1998), Tutte  le  novelle;
(1998), Prose di romanzi; (2003), Scritti giornalistici;  (2005),  Prose  di
ricerca, Milano: Mondadori.
Paratextual material
