
Dadaism in Film

Andy Lantz (Texas A&M University)


Dadafilm1.jpg

Members of the Dada cultural and artistic movement began to experiment with
film as a means to disseminate their stylistic partialities and cultural
values through a new medium free of cultural respectability and aesthetic
pretension. Founded in Zurich, Switzerland, by Tristan Tzara in 1916, this
avant-garde movement would soon spread to France, Germany, the United
States, and elsewhere. Much like the Surrealists that would follow, the
Dadaists sought to liberate their audience from the cultural allegiances,
prejudices, and norms of thinking that, in their view, had been largely
responsible for the catastrophes of World War I.

Unlike Surrealist film, Dadaist film did not seek to lure its viewers into
the cinematic illusion. Instead, Dadaists employed unconventional methods
in order to alienate the audience members and to provide them the distance
with which to reflect upon the meta-artistic (and anti-artistic) quality of
their productions. Film enabled the Dadaists to distort reality, motion,
and perspective; it revealed familiar things in radically unfamiliar but
persuasive new shapes.

It was an American artist, Man Ray, who would produce perhaps the first
Dadaist film, The Return to Reason (1923). The title is blatantly ironic,
as Ray was member of a group founded on the rejection of logic and reason
and the prizing of nonsense, irrationality, and intuition. For him, the
purpose of Dadaism was to test the audiences patience, which he assuredly
accomplished with Reason. To make the film, Ray spread out 30 meters of
film, nailed it to a table, and sprinkled it with salt, pepper, nails, and
tacks. The result was a puzzling succession of white flashes and shapes
dancing over a black background with intermittent shots of Rays muse, Kiki
of Montparnasse.

Hans Richter, another early pioneer of Dadaism, also produced one of his
most influential films during 1923.  In Rhythmus 21, Richter experimented
with the constituent parts of the filmic medium by concentrating on the
playful interaction between basic shapes, such as lines, squares, and
rectangles. Throughout the 1920s, Richter would consistently highlight the
importance of this minimalist rhythm in film while his post-WWI nihilism
translated into a focused critique of German society. Some of the most
notable titles in this critical vein include Filmstudie (1926), Inflation
(1928), and Ghosts Before Breakfast (1928), all of which helped lay the
groundwork for surrealism and other avant-garde movements.

Marcel Duchamps Anmic Cinma (1926) is another significant example of
screen Dadaism. Utilizing what he termed precision optics, Duchamp
attempted to create optical illusions by pairing rotating circles with puns
written on the outer edge with rotoreliefs, or images that appear as three-
dimensional when placed on a rotating surface. Set in motion, these
abstract images appeared to move back and forth in a pulsating rhythm that,
coupled with the suggestive wordplay, elicited an erotically charged
process of free association that exploited traditional grammatical and
filmic practices.

Entracte (Ren Clair, 1924) exhibited a more comprehensible (if absurd)
storyline while demonstrating the Dadaists penchant for visual tricks. The
film concludes with a lengthy chase scene that rivals the antics of Buster
Keaton or Charlie Chaplin, both of whom the Dadaists admired for their
tendency to poke fun at the bourgeois. In the final scene, a group of
people magically disappear one by one. The scene exemplifies the Dadaists
innovative use of the camera as an illusion-producing apparatus.

With Emak-Bakia (1926), Man Ray set out to make a surrealist film, but most
critics agree that its techniques and reception better place it within the
Dada movement.  While most of the film employs Rays disorienting images
(aided by his own invention, the rayograph), the final scene might be read
as an allegory. A woman directly faces the camera with eyes painted on her
eyelids, giving the audience the illusion of a fixed stare. She then opens
her eyes, revealing the deception and suggesting the new way of seeing the
world advanced by the Dadaists.

Unlike the more programmatically pursued literature, painting, and
sculpture of the movement, film Dadaism was a scattered, decentralized
activity. By the end of the 1920s, Dadas influence diminished while many
of its gestures fed into other projects, such as surrealism and other forms
of modernism.


References and further reading:

Foster, Stephen and Kuenzli, Rudolf. Dada Spectrum: The Dialectics of
Revolt. Madison,       Wisconsin: Coda Press, 1979.
Hopkins, David. Dada and Surrealism: A Very Short Introduction. New York:
Oxford      University Press, 2004.
Kuenzli, Rudolf E. (ed.) Dada and Surrealist Film. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1996.

Important Films:

The Return to Reason. Dir. Man Ray. 1923.
Rhythmus 21. Dir. Hans Richter. 1923.
Ballet Mcanique. Dir. Fernand Leger. 1924.
Entracte. Dir. Ren Clair. 1924.
Anemic Cinema. Dir. Marcel Duchamp. 1926.
Emak-Bakia. Dir. Man Ray. 1926.
The Seashell and the Clergyman. Dir. Germaine Dulac. 1926.
L'toile de Mer. Dir. Man Ray. 1928.


