
Dalit Literature



Raj Kumar



Dalit literature is a term that has come into prominence over the past  four
decades to refer to the literary writings of people belonging to low  castes
held as untouchable by Hindu  caste  society.  The  word  Dalit  literally
means crushed, oppressed.

The emergence of Dalit literature may be seen as  reflecting  the  growing
identity,  awareness  and  consciousness  of  the  Dalits  in  Indian  caste
society. Since the late 1960s and 70s an  increasing  number  of  poets  and
writers of the Dalit communities in various regions of India  have  produced
literary works representing the themes of caste oppression,  untouchability,
poverty, repression and revolution. Using the traditionally denied  resource
of literacy, these writings have mounted a powerful critique of  Brahmanical
Hinduism and the caste system.

Longstanding caste hierarchies in Indian society have meant  that  the  life
experiences of Dalit communities traditionally received little attention  in
mainstream Indian literature, often resulting in their invisibilization  and
silencing. At the beginning of the  twentieth  century,  some  writers  from
Hindu upper castes, driven by a zeal for social  reform  or  compassion  for
the downtrodden,  attempted  to  portray  the  lives  of  the  untouchables.
However, in their writings untouchable characters rarely received  realistic
treatment, as images of full-fledged human subjects with vitality, hope  and
despair.  Unnava  Lakshinarayanas  Malapalli  (Telugu,  1923),  K.  Shivram
Karanths  Chomas  Drum  (Kannada,  1925),  Mulk  Raj  Anands  Untouchable
(English, 1935), Thakazhi Sivashankara Pillais Scavengers Son  (Malayalam,
1948) and Gopinath Mohantys Harijan (Odiya, 1948) illustrate such  efforts.


A robust Dalit literary movement arose in  India  only  after  independence,
the lack of access to education being one of  the  principal  factors  which
prevented  its  earlier  emergence.  The  first  major  appearance  of   the
movement,  unsurprisingly,  was  in  Maharashtra,  the  homeland  of  B.  R.
Ambedkar (1891-1956),  the  most  important  champion  of  Dalit  rights,  a
principal architect of  the  constitution  of  independent  India,  and  the
countrys first Law  minister.  In  1972  Marathi  Dalit  writers  formed  a
movement under the banner of Dalit Panthers  in  self-conscious  reference
to the Black Panthers. Shankarrao  Kharat,  Namdev  Dhasal,  Baburao  Bagul,
Raja Dhale, and Narayan Surve were prominent figures of this  movement.  The
main objective of this movement was  to  create  a  counter-culture  and  to
bestow a separate identity for Dalits in society. The emergence  of  a  body
of Dalit literary works in Marathi  had  its  impact  on  other  regions  in
India, and the movement  spread  to  the  neighbouring  states  of  Gujarat,
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and others.

Dalit writers often regard the established canon  of  Indian  literature  as
Hindu literature on account of its exclusion of the  life  experiences  of
low  and  untouchable  castes.   Their   writings   counterpose   ideas   of
humanitarian freedom to the texts, institutions  and  conceptual  categories
of of Hindu society. Many Dalit  writers  privilege  the  representation  of
lived experience of Dalits in its raw undistilled  form  without  euphemism.
This has at times led to the  use  of  the  coarse  language  of  slums  and
villages,  idioms  that  spring  from  a  life  of  poverty,  ignorance  and
violence. The jaggedness of the word,  granulated  structure  of  sentences,
rough hewn expression, combined with a scarcely muted anger which finds  its
expression  in  lambent  satire,  scorching  cynicism,  and  intense  tragic
anguish, provide some of the allotropic forms that have come to  mark  Dalit
works of poetry, prose, fiction, autobiography, drama and  essay.  There  is
an attempt on the part of Dalit writers to evolve  a  new  aesthetics;  they
feel that the genteel elite literary norms do not do justice to the  quality
of the life they render in their writing.

Dalit literature has come into greater prominence in recent  years.  Besides
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, voices of Dalit  protest  can  be
heard from diverse regions such as Odisha, Punjab and  West  Bengal.   Dalit
literary production has increasingly engaged  with  all  the  major  genres.
Autobiographical writing has been one of the strongest and perhaps the  most
widely  discussed  genre  of   Dalit   writing.   The   best   known   Dalit
autobiographies include Hazaris Untouchable: an Autobiography of an  Indian
Outcaste (English, 1951), Daya Pawars Baluta (Marathi, 1982), Sharan  Kumar
Limbales  Akkarmashi  (Marathi,  1984),  D.  P.  Dass  Untouchable   Story
(English, 1985), Vasant Moons Vasti (Marathi, 1997), Om  Prakash  Valmikis
Jhoothan (Hindi, 1997), and  Shyamlals  Untold  Story  of  a  Bhangi  Vice-
chancellor (English: 2001).  Recent Dalit writing  has  shown  an  increased
preoccupation with gender-related issues.  This has been accompanied by  the
appearance of a number of Dalit  women  writers  who  have  drawn  on  their
personal experiences to present a strong critique of the  patriarchal  order
within their communities and  outside.  Kumud  Pawdes  Antasphot  (Marathi,
1981),  Shantabai  Kambles  Majya  Jalmachi  Chitrakatha  (Marathi,  1990),
Bamas Karukku (Tamil, 1992), Urmila  Pawars  Aaidan  (Marathi,  2003)  and
Baby Kambles The Prison We Broke (Marathi, 2008) are among the  best  known
autobiographies written by Dalit women. Although the  novel  form  developed
relatively late in Dalit writing, recent years have witnessed the  emergence
of a substantial corpus. Some of the novels which are already  available  in
English are: Joseph Macwans Stepchild (Gujarati, 1997),  Kalyana  G.  Raos
Untouchable Spring (Telugu, 2000), P. Sivakamis The Grip of Change  (Tamil,
2006) and Sharan Kumar  Limbales  Hindu  (Marathi,  2010).  A  paradigmatic
shift is beginning to be visible, with  many  Dalit  writers  raising  their
voices against different forms of oppression other than  caste,  related  to
class,  gender,  ethnicity,  language,  and  religion.  There  has  been  an
acceleration  of  translations  of  Dalit  literature  into  English.   Many
prominent  publishers  have  brought  out  volumes  of  Dalit   writing   in
translation in recent years, and  Dalit  studies  have  been  introduced  in
several universities of India  and  abroad.  These  tendencies  promise  the
emergence of Dalit  literature  -  with  the  challenges  it  poses  towards
mainstream literary norms -  as a major  force  in  the  literary  field  in
India in the coming years.



Timeline



1958        The first conference of the Maharashtra Dalit Sahitya Sangha.

1963        Baburao Baguls first collection of stories

1972        Formation of Dalit Panther

1973        Namdev Dhasals Golpitha

1982        Daya Pawars Baluta

1984        Sharan Kumar Limbales Akkarmashi

1992        Bamas Karukku

1997        Om Prakash Valmikis Jhootan

2006        P. Sivakamis The Grip of Change



Selected Bibliography



Anand, S. (2003). Touchable Tales: Publishing and Reading Dalit  Literature.
Pondicherry: Navayana.

Basu, Tapan (ed.) (2002). Translating Caste. New Delhi: Katha.

Franco, Fernando, et al. (2004).  Journeys  to  Freedom:  Dalit  Narratives.
Calcutta: Samya.

Joshi, Barbara (ed.) (1986). Untouchable: Voices  of  the  Dalit  Liberation
Movement. New Delhi: Select Book Service Syndicate.

Kumar, Raj (2010). Dalit Personal  Narratives:  Reading  Caste,  Nation  and
Identity. New Delhi: Orient BlackSwan.

Limbale, Sharankumar (2004). Towards  an  Aesthetics  of  Dalit  Literature:
History, Controveries and Considerations. Translated from  Marathi  by  Alok
Mukherjee. Calcutta: Orient Longman.

 Nagraj, D. R. (1993).The Flaming Feet: A Study of Dalit Movement in  India.
Bangalore: South Forum Press.

 Zelliot, Elanor (1992). From Untouchable to Dalit. New Delhi: Manohar.



