
Carlos Isamitt Alarcn
(Rengo, Chile, 1887, Santiago, Chile, 1974)

Composer, musicologist, teacher and visual artist. He  was  a  noted  artist
both in the field of visual arts as in music. In painting, belonged  to  the
generation of transition towards a modernist aesthetic and  an  art  with  a
critical background. In music, pioneered approaching to indigenous roots  in
Chile, as a  researcher  and  as  a  composer,  synthesizing  a  style  that
combined eclectically that material and techniques deriving from  differents
trends of European music. He becomed a benchmark in his field  that  remains
even to this day.

At an early age he is accepted in the Normal  School  Jos  Abelardo  Nez,
graduating as teacher at the age of 17. Subsequently, in  1905,  he  entered
the National Conservatory of Music, where he  studied  with  Pedro  Humberto
Allende and Domingo Brescia. Simultaneously, he studied painting with  Pedro
Lira and the Spanish artist Alvarez de Sotomayor at the  Chilean  School  of
Fine Arts. He belonged to the Generation of 13, art collective that marks  a
break with the traditional line of  the  nineteenth-century  visual  art  in
Chile proposing works with social content, near to a realistic  trend,  such
as  traditionalist  and  Creole  scenes,  and  the  indigenous  and   social
realities ignored by bourgeois manifestations.

The interest showed  in  Isamitt  painting  about  traditional  culture  and
especially in the native one finds its correlation in music. While  some  of
his works were composed in a non-representational and traditional  language,
his most relevant and numerous repertoire are the ones where  he  draws  all
the learning obtained in indigenous communities. Between 1931  and  1937  he
makes an intense field work in Mapuche reductions of southern Chile,  living
with them for periods up to seven months a year and  assimilating  the  more
detailed aspects of musical culture through  collection,  transcription  and
analysis. The relevance  of  his  research  is  such  that  even  today  his
articles, many of them available in the  Revista  Musical  Chilena  [Chilean
Musical Review], remain as a reference for any  study  to  be  performed  on
this  topic.  All  this  knowledge  was  put  into  his  musical  creations,
generating an own and particular style.

His work's production began  at  1913.  The  catalog  comprises  essentially
chamber pieces for various means and some symphonic  works,  many  of  which
include Mapudungu language texts. His most representative  compositions  are
the Suite Sinfnica (1932) and Mito Araucano  (1935),  both  for  orchestra,
Friso Araucano (1931) and Cantata  Huilliche  (1963-65)  both  for  soprano,
baritone and orchestra, the ballet El pozo dorado (1942)  -award-winning  in
the American Competition of the  Municipality  of  Santiago  in  the  fourth
centenary of its foundation- and Evocaciones  Huilliches  (1945)  songs  for
tenor and piano.

The aesthetics of Isamitt reacted against  the  nineteenth-century  European
nationalism. He criticized the procedures used by most  of  the  nationalist
composers, who transcribed or imitated folkloric  tunes  in  art  music.  He
believed that proceeding this way folklore were  subjected  to  a  state  of
servitude. Instead he admitted Bartok and de Falla prospects, as implied  to
build  the  music  taking  as  a  starting  point  the  folkloric   material
developing from there a language of  their  own.  Thus,  although  Isamitt's
style appears in most of his works very  close  to  Debussy's  Impressionism
sonority by influence of his teacher P. H.  Allende  and  especially  Carlos
Lavin, they who determined that profile for the Chilean nationalism,  it  is
certainly much more rich and complex.

Although his solid work and significant presence in the Chilean musical  and
pictorial milieu earned him a wide  recognition  among  their  peers,  their
status  as  "indianist-nationalist"  and  the  ideological  nature  of   his
aesthetic decisions found  some  resistance  in  the  hegemonic  circles  of
Chilean music, akin with Germanic language and aesthetics during  the  first
half on 20th century. Still,  though  belatedly,  he  awarded  the  National
Prize of Arts in Music in 1965.

Isamitt's works built on thematic material taken directly from  the  Mapuche
music seek to  fully  preserve  the  original  melodies  and,  where  it  is
possible, build harmonies based  on  the  sounds  of  their  own  performing
context. Thus, the composer's work is to complement by the  construction  of
an orchestral complex, distributing  harmony  among  different  instrumental
colors to emphasizes  the  most  relevant  aspects  of  the  melody,  either
through the creation of an atmosphere to strengthen its rhythmic  character,
its emotional nature or, if it uses texts, the  poetic  sense  of  them.  In
this aspect debussian's traits  actually  appear,  as  the  Mapuches  tunes
suggest a modal language and the composer avoids both  the  forte  intensity
and sound agglomerations, preferring instead  to  highlight  the  individual
timbres or reduced  instrumental  groups  which  approximate  his  symphonic
production to chamber music sonority. This is the feature  that  appears  in
his Friso Araucano, work that won the First Prize in a  Composition  Contest
organized by the  University  of  Chile  in  1933,  and  probably  the  most
representative of his cosmovision.

Despite the impressionist influence, Isamitt pioneered the  introduction  of
Expressionism techniques into  Chilean  academic  milieu  since  the  1920's
decade. Thus, there appear atonality traits typical of Schoenberg  and  Berg
before the development of dodecaphonic system and in the tendency to  timbre
fragmentation in the manner of Schoenberg himself at an early  stage.  These
aspects are reflected most obviously in Evocaciones Huilliches.

The main of Isamitt's contribution is the  introduction  of  new  inputs  to
Chilean art music, from the melodic, rhythmic and harmonic, by  the  use  of
materials and stylistic ideas adopted from indigenous  culture  as  well  as
its own original intervention in such material with an eclectic  combination
of elements who were so opposed in the European tradition as those own  from
the Impressionism and  Expressionism  trends.  He  was  also  essential  for
valuing the Mapuche culture and music in times when it  was  discredited  by
considering  it  revealing  of  some  negative   traits   of   the   Chilean
psychological profile.

                                                     Nicols Masquiarn Daz


Bibliography
Barros, R.; Dannemann M (1966) 'Carlos  Isamitt:  Folklore  e  Indigenismo',
Revista Musical Chilena N 97: 37-42.
Claro, S. (1966) 'Catlogo de la obra de Carlos  Isamitt',  Revista  Musical
Chilena N 97: 54-67.
Claro, S.; Urrutia, J (1973) Historia  de  la  Msica  en  Chile,  Santiago:
Editorial Orbe.
Daz, R.; Gonzlez J. P. (2011)  Cantus  Firmus.  Mito  y  narrativa  de  la
msica chilena de arte del siglo XX, Santiago: Editorial Amapola.
Editorial Board (1966) 'Entrevista: Carlos Isamitt, el hombre, el artista  y
el investigador', Revista Musical Chilena N 97: 5-13.
Gonzlez, J. P. (1993) 'Estilo y funcin social  de  la  msica  chilena  de
origen mapuche', Revista Musical Chilena N 179: 78-113
Lago, T. (1966) 'Isamitt en la pintura chilena', Revista Musical Chilena  N
97: 43-48.
Salas,  V.  (1951)  La  creacin  musical  en  Chile,  1900-1951,  Santiago:
Ediciones Universidad de Chile.
Salas, V. (1966) 'Creacin musical y msica aborigen en la  obra  de  Carlos
isamitt', Revista Musical Chilena N 97: 14-21

