

The centrality of dance to aesthetic modernism led to dance becoming a major preoccupation of modernist literature and a model for the generation of the literary text. Concurrently, given the emergence of dance modernism as a performance field, other forms of writing — critical, philosophical, anthropological, and psychoanalytic — emerged to explore the phenomenon of dance as an important part of the contemporary world of art and culture. Dance artists themselves have produced a significant amount of writing and theorisation.



The early twentieth century generated a wealth of textual reflections on dance across a range of disciplines. Recognising the fundamentally interdisciplinary characteristic of dance as reflected in the textual and visual documents of modernism, it is evident that dance is present in texts not appearing to address it directly, such as Marcel Mauss’s The Notion of Body Techniques (1935). In other words, to write of dance is not always to write about dance — dance movement, for instance, played an important role in modernist visual practices of abstraction.  As a result, dance writing is not a distinct genre. 

The centrality of dance to aesthetic modernism led to dance becoming a major preoccupation of modernist literature and a model for the generation of the literary text. Concurrently, given the emergence of dance modernism as a performance field, other forms of writing — critical, philosophical, anthropological, and psychoanalytic — emerged to explore the phenomenon of dance as an important part of the contemporary world of art and culture. Dance artists themselves have produced a significant amount of writing and theorisation.



The early twentieth century generated a wealth of textual reflections on dance across a range of disciplines. Recognising the fundamentally interdisciplinary characteristic of dance as reflected in the textual and visual documents of modernism, it is evident that dance is present in texts not appearing to address it directly, such as Marcel Mauss’s The Notion of Body Techniques (1935). In other words, to write of dance is not always to write about dance — dance movement, for instance, played an important role in modernist visual practices of abstraction.  As a result, dance writing is not a distinct genre.



Nevertheless, dance writing or writing on dance is found in a variety of genres, including dance criticism, history, theory, anthropological studies, philosophic and literary reflections and inquiries, manifestos, scenarios or libretti, autobiographies, biographies, memoirs of dancers and choreographers, and choreographic notes and treatises. Modernism, as Gabriele Bandstetter shows, abounds in ekphrastic literary texts that mediate between performance, visual iconography of dancing (going back to antiquity), and philosophical notions about dance. Susan Jones points out, a literary text can function as a direct influence for choreographic invention. On the other hand, dance was conceived in modernist literature not just as a potential theme, but also as a springboard for the creation of poetry. Danced movement was thus deployed not only as a topic, but also as a structuring principle for literary texts (akin to the way in which literary texts can provide structural principles for choreography). Dance can thus be perceived as existing in the text, while a dance might be of the text so that — as initially articulated by Stéphane Mallarmé — dance itself became a potential act of writing in itself, just as writing became an act of dancing. The visual evocation of movement enabled visual artists to suggest the presence of corporeality in abstract art in the absence of figuration, while in anthropology, dance and trance were privileged terms of ritual analysis. In psychology, the notion of the psychosomatic and the symptom (particularly with respect to hysteria) gained traction as examples of expressive movement were present in or associated with dance. 



Dance modernism gave rise to an increasing need for research and archives, the most ambitious example being Les Archives Internationales de la Danse, established in 1932 by Rolf de Maré to support the study of dance from all cultures and nations, while Lincoln Kirstein established a Dance Archive in the Museum of Modern Art in New York (1940-1949). Both of these initiatives stimulated publications and exhibitions, giving rise to dance criticism.



In Germany, Hans Brandenburg wrote extensively on modern dance, while director Georg Fuchs envisaged dance as crucial to the re-theatricalisation of the stage. In 1927 in the United States, John Martin became the first dance critic for the New York Times, and published a number of books of dance theory introducing the concept of metakinesis. Lincoln Kirstein published pamphlets, criticism, and histories of ballet, and founded the journal Dance Index, while Edna Ocko covered dance from a left-wing perspective. In France, André Levinson, Fernand Divoire, and Léandre Vaillant chronicled and wrote theoretically on dance. Also in France, Serge Lifar — a dancer and choreographer — published historical studies, dance criticism, and books on neo-classical technique. Publications specialising in dance writing were launched in the United States and Germany, including the Dance Observer in the U.S. and Schrifttanz in Germany, while in France dance was often discussed in the pages of La Revue Musicale Commaedia, and La Revue Blanche. Other dancers — although certainly not all — wrote influentially on choreographic poetics, among them Isadora Duncan, Rudolf Laban, Mary Wigman, Valentine de Saint-Point, Martha Graham, Katherine Dunham, and Merce Cunningham. Laban was a highly published theorist of movement analysis, drawing on dance and writing to renew the idea of dance notation. 



Despite an animus against language in dance modernism, and a generally shared conviction about the non-verbal nature of dance, the role played by the written word in dance modernism was both formidable and significant. It set the groundwork for the development of the field of dance studies in the latter part of the twentieth century. The traditional silence of dance was in part responsible for its alignment with the written word in opposition to voice. However, modernist dance also prefigured the de-disciplining of writing as trace and the defection of writing from literature. The relation of dance to writing is, and continues to be, complex and multi-faceted as well as generative for dance, literature, and visual culture. Motion capture, for example, is an extension of dance notation into a visual-scriptural realm, which iterates a situation of modernity within which dance gestures to the visual, textual, and theoretical dimensions of movement. 

Further reading:

 (Brandstetter)



 (Franko)



 (Jones)



 (Louppe)



 (Mauss)



 (Noland and Ness)