

A prolific film reviewer and director of eight films in the early 1920s, Louis Delluc is renowned for being France’s first film critic – a justifiable status to the extent that he was the first figure to develop and apply specifically cinematic criteria in his reception of films. Delluc began as a theatre critic and playwright before turning to film reviewing in 1917, after exposure to the nascent Hollywood cinema of Griffith, DeMille and Chaplin. In the seven years up to his premature death, he wrote for publications including Le Film, Paris-Midi, Le Journal du Ciné-Club and Cinéa, and developed a literary, often ironic writing style privileging a radically subjective approach to the cinematic viewing experience over the establishment of objective artistic norms.

A prolific film reviewer and director of eight films in the early 1920s, Louis Delluc is renowned for being France’s first film critic – a justifiable status to the extent that he was the first figure to develop and apply specifically cinematic criteria in his reception of films. Delluc began as a theatre critic and playwright before turning to film reviewing in 1917, after exposure to the nascent Hollywood cinema of Griffith, DeMille and Chaplin. In the seven years up to his premature death, he wrote for publications including Le Film, Paris-Midi, Le Journal du Ciné-Club and Cinéa, and developed a literary, often ironic writing style privileging a radically subjective approach to the cinematic viewing experience over the establishment of objective artistic norms. Delluc is best known for having coined the term ‘cinéaste’ (a common French word for filmmaker) and for propagating the theory of ‘photogénie’, a concept centred on the unique visual qualities that the cinema is able to impart on its chosen objects. His films (including Fièvre [1921], La Femme de nulle part [1922] and L’Inondation [1923]) are less acclaimed than his critical writings, but evince affinities with the output of contemporaries such as Jean Epstein, Abel Gance and Marcel L’Herbier. In honour of his work, the Prix Louis Delluc is awarded every year to promising young French filmmakers.



File: Delluc.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-dE09pnRerRs/UbDVjG9LBVI/AAAAAAAAAHk/dJ3UPMpq-qs/s1600/Louis+Delluc.jpg





List of Works

Fumée noire (France, 1920)

Le Silence (France, 1920)

Le Chemin d’Ernoa (France, 1920)

Fièvre (France, 1921)

Le Tonnerre (France, 1921)

La Femme de nulle part (France, 1922)

L’Inondation (France, 1923)

Further reading:

(Abel)

(G. Delluc)

(L. Delluc)

(Lherminier)