
Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich
Daniel Bangert

The Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich (Monuments of Music in Austria) is
a series of critical editions of historical music, primarily by composers
born or working in Austria during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich (DT) was an initiative of the
musicologist Guido Adler who served as its founding General Editor.


In 1888, the musicologist Guido Adler petitioned the Austrian Ministry of
Culture and Education for the publication of a series of editions of
historical music (Monumenta Historiae Musices), a project that was to
become the Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich (Monuments of Music in
Austria). Adler became General Editor of the series at a meeting of the
Gesellschaft zur Herausgabe von Denkmlern der Tonkunst in sterreich
(Society for the Publication of Monuments of Music in Austria) held in 1893
and the first volume of the series appeared in 1894 (Masses by Johann
Joseph Fux). Adler served as General Editor from 1893-1938 and others who
have held this position include Erich Schenk (1939-74) and Othmar Wessely
(1974-98). Music critic Eduard Hanslick served as the first president of
the DT Society (1893-97) and members of the editorial board have included
prominent composers such as Johannes Brahms, Gustav Mahler, and Richard
Strauss. The journal Studien zur Musikwissenschaft: Beihefte der Denkmler
der Tonkunst in sterreich (Studies in Musicology: Supplements of the DT)
was founded in 1913.

The Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich (DT) has published over 150
volumes and focuses on music beyond the canonic repertoire. Volumes include
editions of music from the Trent Codices and works by Heinrich Isaac,
Jacobus Vaet, Jacob Handl (or Gallus), Johann Jacob Froberger, Heinrich
Ignaz Franz Biber, Johann Heinrich Schmelzer, Georg and Gottlieb Muffat,
Antonio Caldara, Johann Ernst Eberlin, Michael Haydn, and Carl Ditters von
Dittersdorf. For a list of all volumes and their contents see the website
of the DT (http://www.dtoe.at/Publikationen/Bandverzeichnis.php).

References and further reading

Eybl, M. (2014) Denkmler der Tonkunst in sterreich (DT): History and
Editorial Program, Notes 70 (3), 413-20. (A brief history of the DT
Society.)

Hilscher, E. Th. (1995) Denkmalpflege und Musikwissenschaft: Einhundert
Jahre Gesellschaft zur Herausgabe der Tonkunst in sterreich (1893-1993).
Tutzing: Hans Schneider. (A detailed history of the Denkmler der Tonkunst
in sterreich.)

