Hannah Pollin-Galay



Di Goldene Keyt (The Golden Chain) was a Yiddish-language literary journal, published out of Tel Aviv between the years 1949 and 1995. Its name is an allusion to the 1903 play written by I.L. Peretz , and is a canonic metaphor for Jewish cultural tradition. The journal served as one of the most prominent, longest-running Yiddish literary outlets after WWII, credited with having unified new works from disparate locations and strands of modernism into one literary conversation. Poet Avraham Sutzkever founded the journal just two years after having moved to Israel and served as editor-in-chief for all of its 141 issues. Though anti-Yiddish sentiments were strong in Israel at the time of DGK’s initiation, Sutzkever managed to gain financial support for the project from the largest Israeli labor union, the Histadrut Klalit and its Secretary, Yosef Shprintsak, who saw DGK as a means of disseminating a positive Israeli national image to Yiddish readers abroad. The journal included original works from the most prominent Yiddish writers residing throughout the world, such as Kadya Molodowsky, Chaim Grade, Peretz Markish, Uri Tzvi Grinberg, Yakov Glatstein and Isaac Bashevis Singer; in addition to Sutzkever’s own extensive postwar oeuvre. Yiddish language translations of Hebrew literature, from writers such as Natan Alterman and Amos Oz, reflected the journal’s ambition to foster Hebrew-Yiddish literary exchange. DGK also published translations of world literature, including the works of Paul Celan, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Naguib Mahfouz. Illustrations from significant visual artists, among them Marc Chagall and Samuel Bak, accompanied the journal’s prose, poetry, criticism and research articles.  



References:

Benjamin Harshav, “Sutzkever: Life and Poetry” in Barbara and Benjamin Harshav trans., A. Sutzkever: Selected Poetry and Prose. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 2-23, esp. 22-23.



Avraham Novershtern, Avraham Sutzkever: Tsum vern a ben shivim (Jerusalem: Jewish National and University Library, 1983): 179–184.



Avraham Sutzkever, “A por verter vegn onhyeb,” Di Goldene Keyt no. 100 (1979): 3-4.