
Danielle Child



Kaprow, Allan (1927-2006)               Word Count: 539

Allan Kaprow was an American artist whose oeuvre included painting,
assemblage and environments. He is best known as the originator of
happenings, a term he coined in the late 1950s. A happening refers to
one-off (often scripted) performances intended to break down the barrier
between art and life through eliminating the distinction between artist and
audience and taking place across differing locales. Happenings played an
important role in the transition from modernist painting to performance art
in the mid-twentieth century. The debt that this new type of practice owes
to modernist painting is made explicit in Kaprows seminal essay, The
Legacy of Jackson Pollock, published in Art News, October 1958. In the
essay, Kaprow proposes an alternate legacy to the formalist one established
by American art critic Clement Greenberg. Kaprow boldly claimed that
Pollock destroyed painting in that in his action paintings , artist,
spectator and the outside world are interchangeably involved. Kaprow thus
believed that happenings belonged to the legacy of Pollocks painting in
that both produce works of art through common-place actions. Pollocks
painting achieves this through a deskilled use of gesture; Kaprows
happenings do so in their bringing together non-art participants and
performance through commonplace acts (such as shouting, eating lunch,
brushing teeth).

Kaprow represented a new generation of New York artists who, unlike their
forefathers, were not directly affected by the Great Depression of the
1930s. In contrast to the majority of first generation New York School
artists, Kaprow was university-educated; while undertaking a BA in
Philosophy and Art History at New York University (1945-49), Kaprow studied
painting at the Hans Hoffman School of Fine Arts, New York (1947-48). After
completing graduate coursework in Philosophy, he undertook a MA in Art
History at Columbia University, New York, under Meyer Shapiro, from 1950-52
and founded the Hansa gallery in 1952. In the same year, Kaprow witnessed
an early Carnegie Hall performance of John Cages 433 (in which four
minutes and thirty three seconds of silence are performed); it was a
pivotal moment in his artistic career. Five years later, Kaprow returned to
study musical composition under Cage at the New School for Social Research,
New York. The influence of Cage is evident in the script for 18 Happenings
in 6 Parts (1959) [see Kaprow (1966b)]. Prior to the Reuben Gallery
performance of this piece, Kaprow had experimented with happenings among
friends. One such occasion - Pastorale, held at George Segals farm in 1958
 reportedly ended in chaos due to inebriated participants not knowing what
to do. As a result, subsequent happenings were scripted and meticulously
rehearsed. Kaprow continued to blur the line between art and life through
these directed acts until his death in 2006.



References and further reading

Kaprow, A. (1966) Environments, Assemblage and Happenings, New York: Harry
N. Abrams.

      ------ (1966b) Some Recent Happenings, New York: Great Bear (available
      online via Ubuweb http://www.ubu.com/historical/gb/kaprow_recent.pdf)

      ----- (1968) How to Make a Happening (lecture), sound recording,
      http://www.ubu.com/sound/kaprow.html

      ----- (2003) Essays on the Blurring of Art and Life, ed. by Jeff
      Kelley, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Kaizen, W. (2003) Allan Kaprow and the Spread of Painting, Grey Room 13:
80-107.

Kirby, M. (1965) Happenings: An Illustrated Anthology, New York: Duttom and
Co.

Ubuweb Kaprow archive: http://www.ubu.com/historical/kaprow/index.html





Image information:
Getty Images
Editorial
#87895040
Kaprow Prepares For '18 Happenings In 6 Parts'
By: Fred W. McDarrah
Premium Archive
People: Allan Kaprow

