
Direct Carving

Direct carving was a technique developed in the early twentieth century and
described making sculpture that involved the hand of the sculptor working
with hammer and chisel directly onto a block of stone or wood. Though
models were sometimes used, direct carving was a way of working that
enabled sculptors to have close and intimate contact with their materials.
By using this direct method, sculptors rejected academic traditions where
sculptors created clay models and had them scaled up and transferred to
marble by a workshop of technicians. Direct carving became a concept
closely aligned with modernism as the twentieth century progressed,.
Particularly in  and in Britain in particular, for their work t to be
identified as a modern work piece of sculpture, a sculptor was expected to
work directly on their material.

In France it was known as taille directe, and one of the earliest pieces
recognised as being made using this method was Constantin Brancusis The
Kiss (1907). For sculptors in Britain, the use of the method gained
momentum in part due to the legacy of hand making of the Arts and Crafts
movement. The method also allowed sculptors to reject the representation of
flesh in stone, instead professing themselves to be representing stone and
remaining true to the material. For most of those practicing direct
carving, it became a way of knowing the material, usually a local one, and
of working with that material to reveal the work of art within.

List of worksKey works:

Constantin Brancusi: The Kiss (1907, Muzeul de Arta at Craiova, Rumania)
Eric Gill: Mother and Child series (1910-11, Tate, Leeds City Art Gallery,
National Museum Wales)
Jacob Epstein: Sun God (1910, Tate)
Henri Gaudier-Brzeska: Red Stone Dancer (c. 1913, Tate)

References and further reading:
Sculpture and the Pursuit of a Modern Ideal in Britain, c. 1880-1930,
edited by David Getsy (Ashgate, 2004)
Modern Sculpture Reader, Jon Wood, David Hulks, Alex Potts (Henry Moore
Institute, 2012)
The New Sculpture, Susan Beattie (Yale University Press, 1983)

I am trying to finalise a list more texts to go here  let me know if that
is necessary!
