
The Dreyfus Affair (1894-1906)

The Dreyfus Affair was a French political controversy resulting from the
unjust conviction and imprisonment of Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish
artillery officer, for alleged espionage. By 1899, the Affair had
polarized France between Dreyfusards and anti-Dreyfusards, pointing to
profound divisions between traditionalist and modernizing forces.

In September 1894, the French War Ministry acquired a document called the
bordereau, a memo offering a variety of military secrets to Germany.
Dreyfus fell under suspicion because he had recently rotated through a
variety of departments, received an unfavorable performance review, and, as
a German-speaking Jew from Alsace, aroused the prejudices of his accusers.
Despite bewildered protests of innocence, Dreyfus was imprisoned, court-
martialed, publically stripped of his insignia and sabre, and shipped to
Devils Island, where he would remain in solitary confinement for the next
four-and-a-half years. The press leaked his name before his trial and
vicious anti-Semitic rhetoric erupted across France.

However, suspicions of Dreyfuss innocence remained. In summer 1896, a new
head of the Intelligence Services, Georges Picquart, received a second
document and identified a different man (Esterhazy) as its source.
Reviewing Dreyfuss file, Picquart realized that Esterhazys handwriting
matched the bordereaus and that Dreyfus must be innocent. Picquart,
however, encountered fierce resistance to the exoneration of Dreyfus.
Forged documents were added to Dreyfuss secret file, and Picquart himself
was threatened, dismissed from the military, and imprisoned.

Picquarts lawyer then took the evidence to politicians and to the novelist
mile Zola, who in January 1898 published a famous open letter to President
Faure. Denouncing the Dreyfus Affair as a stain on the French state, Zolas
letter ran under the giant headline JACCUSE! and denounced many of the
key figures by name. His subsequent trial for libel brought additional
attention to the case.

In 1899, Dreyfus returned to France, was inexplicably convicted in a second
court-martial, pardoned, and finally rehabilitated in 1906. He served his
country with distinction in WWI and lived until 1935.

The Dreyfus Affair is important first of all as a notorious miscarriage of
justice and as an example of the virulence of modern anti-Semitism. As
evidence of Dreyfuss innocence emerged, however, the affair also became a
political struggle between traditionalists and progressives. Dreyfuss
supporters tended to be politicians in the Third Republic and anticlerical
intellectuals, while the anti-Dreyfusards included the army hierarchy,
monarchists, and many Catholics. The Dreyfus Affair thus revealed deep
divisions and anxieties within French society. These anxieties included
fears about German espionage, internal enemies, and French national
identity. The Dreyfus Affair has been the object of study from a multitude
of perspectives, such as the origins of counter-intelligence, the ability
of the press both to stir up hatred and to uncover abuses of power, anti-
Semitism and secularism in French society, potential abuses of secret
evidence, and the importance of whistleblowers like Picquart and Zola.

Bibliography:  UGA Law Alfred Dreyfus Information Site. The University of
Georgia School of Law, 2005. Web. 1 April 2014
<http://www.law.uga.edu/dreyfus/bibliography.pdf>

Suzanne Black
SUNY Oneonta

