

Dubuffet, Jean (1901-1985)

Although he had tried his hand at art earlier in life, it was not until
1942, at the age of forty-one in German-occupied France, that Jean
Dubuffet committed himself to producing art full-time. An extraordinarily
experimental artist who embraced unconventional materials and
investigated different media, Dubuffets style and content varied greatly
throughout his career.  In the fall of 1944, Dubuffet held his first solo
exhibition at Galerie Ren Drouin in Paris. Exhibiting garishly colored
paintings featuring the mundane subjects of everyday life, including cows
and suburban street faades executed in a crude, flat, and graffiti-like
manner, Dubuffet agitated many critics with his perceived adoption of an
anti-establishment aesthetic and philosophy. Nonetheless, he quickly
ascended on the Paris and American art scenes upon his development of a
technique - influenced by the thickly impastoed works of Jean Fautrier -
in which he often incised compositional forms into thick layers of paint
that had been mixed with materials including grit, gravel, and glass. The
resulting textured, highly complex surfaces were a feature of Dubuffets
most well known works of the 1940s, including his series of caricatured
and unflattering portraits of intellectuals in the circle of Jean
Paulhan, the writer and editor who could be considered Dubuffets most
important early champion.  Dubuffet was a co-founder of the Compagnie de
lArt Brut in the late 1940s.
After introducing his complex paint mixtures in the 1940s, Dubuffet began
to incorporate butterfly wings, tree bark, and cut up fragments of his
own paintings and works on paper into his two dimensional works and he
began creating three-dimensional assemblages of found, but manipulated
materials. He also experimented in different genres, including
bookmaking, lithography, writing, and music. In the 1960s, Dubuffet moved
away from his treatment of themes inspired by the everyday subjects of
the real world in order to pursue his so-called Hourloupe cycle.
Instigated by doodles made in pen while he was on the telephone, these
works explored interior, mental constructs and featured cellular, organic
shapes made in red, blue, black, and white. This style dominated
Dubuffets later artistic production and transferred into his forays in
performance and monumental sculpture.
Dubuffet was highly productive during his four-decade career. In addition
to his artistic output, he also played a critical role in the shaping of
his own legacy by overseeing the production of his own 38-volume
catalogue raisonn, by establishing his own Foundation, and by writing
extensively about his artistic philosophy as well as his own
autobiography shortly before his death in 1985. Dubuffet also forged a
name for himself in relation to his investigations of art brut (raw art)
and his status as co-founder of the Compagnie de lArt Brut. While the
concept of art brut was a slippery one, it most generally could be
defined as work produced by untrained art world outsiders. Often rough
and schematic, the examples of art brut that Dubuffet collected featured
formal characteristics that often resonated with the type of work that he
himself fervently produced.

References and further reading

Abadie, D. (ed.) (2001) Dubuffet, Paris: Centre Pompidou.

Damisch, H. (ed.) (1967-95) Prospectus et tous crits suivants, Paris:
Gallimard.

Dubuffet, J. (2001) Biographie au pas de course, Paris: Gallimard.

Loreau, M. (ed.) (1966-91) Catalogue des travaux de Jean Dubuffet, vols. 1-
38, Paris: Pauvert.

http://www.dubuffetfondation.com/index_ang.htm

[pic]
Fig. 1. Jean Dubuffet, Vue de Paris, la vie de plaisir, February 1944,
Private collection.


     Copyright: Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris
      Obtain image and image rights from: Fondation Dubuffet, Paris (Contact
      : Florence Quenu tl : 00 33 (0)1 47 34 12 63fax : 00 33 (0)1 47 34
      19 5
