

Marcel Duchamp was a prominent artist, and an influential figure in aesthetics or the philosophy of art, as well as experimental cinema. In 1924, he collaborated with artist Man Ray and composer Erik Satie on René Clair’s film Entr'acte. Two years later, Duchamp directed Anémic cinema (1926), a short experimental film that explores further themes the artist had previously dealt with in other media, including sculpture and painting. In it, Duchamp used for the first time spinning discs he called Rotoreliefs, on which various geometrical designs and printed words were placed, showcasing his interest in optical illusions and mechanical art. In 1943, he collaborated with renowned American experimental filmmaker, Maya Deren, on a short film they never finished, Witch's Cradle. The film was meant to explore fantastical elements in Peggy Guggenheim’s Art of this Century Gallery, where other works by Duchamp were exhibited. In 1957, Duchamp co-directed with German artist Hans Richter (who previously directed a film based on Duchamp’s work, Dreams That Money Can Buy, 1947), and famous French writer and filmmaker Jean Cocteau, the film 8 × 8: A Chess Sonata in 8 Movements. The work portrayed the unconscious of chess, a game about which Duchamp had a life-long passion.    

Marcel Duchamp was a prominent artist, and an influential figure in aesthetics or the philosophy of art, as well as experimental cinema. In 1924, he collaborated with artist Man Ray and composer Erik Satie on René Clair’s film Entr'acte. Two years later, Duchamp directed Anémic cinema (1926), a short experimental film that explores further themes the artist had previously dealt with in other media, including sculpture and painting. In it, Duchamp used for the first time spinning discs he called Rotoreliefs, on which various geometrical designs and printed words were placed, showcasing his interest in optical illusions and mechanical art. In 1943, he collaborated with renowned American experimental filmmaker, Maya Deren, on a short film they never finished, Witch's Cradle. The film was meant to explore fantastical elements in Peggy Guggenheim’s Art of this Century Gallery, where other works by Duchamp were exhibited. In 1957, Duchamp co-directed with German artist Hans Richter (who previously directed a film based on Duchamp’s work, Dreams That Money Can Buy, 1947), and famous French writer and filmmaker Jean Cocteau, the film 8 × 8: A Chess Sonata in 8 Movements. The work portrayed the unconscious of chess, a game about which Duchamp had a life-long passion.    



Selected Works: 

Nu descendant un escalier n° 2 (painting, 1912)

Roue de bicyclette (readymade, 1913

Fountain (readymade, 1917)

Anémic cinema (film, 1926)

Witch's Cradle (film, co-directed, 1943)

8 × 8: A Chess Sonata in 8 Movements (film, co-directed, 1957)

Further reading:



(Judovitz)