

The Chilean architect Emilio Duhart Harosteguy is one of the most recognised modern architects and urban planners in the country. He is especially notable for the period he spent working as assistant for Walter Gropius and Konrad Wachsmann in the States and for Le Corbusier in France, whom he collaborated with in the planning of Chandigarh city in India. While Duhart was born in Temuco, he spent his childhood and primary and secondary education in France. He returned to Santiago and graduated as an architect from the School of Architecture at the Catholic University of Chile in 1941 and continued his studies at Harvard University (Master in Architecture 1942) and the Institut d’Urbanisme Sorbonne (Master in Urban Planning 1952). 



Duhart’s first commissions were in relation to the Chillán earthquake (1939) reconstruction, and he worked mainly in rural housing as part of the Help and Reconstruction Corporation initiatives (1941). He belonged to a group of architects that went abroad at the time, and he imported foreign ideas and modes of architectural production to Chile; the other two main modes of foreign influence were architectural publications and external visitors to the country. From 1951 he taught at the Catholic University, becoming Director of the Institute of Urbanism, Housing and Planning. 

The Chilean architect Emilio Duhart Harosteguy is one of the most recognised modern architects and urban planners in the country. He is especially notable for the period he spent working as assistant for Walter Gropius and Konrad Wachsmann in the States and for Le Corbusier in France, whom he collaborated with in the planning of Chandigarh city in India. While Duhart was born in Temuco, he spent his childhood and primary and secondary education in France. He returned to Santiago and graduated as an architect from the School of Architecture at the Catholic University of Chile in 1941 and continued his studies at Harvard University (Master in Architecture 1942) and the Institut d’Urbanisme Sorbonne (Master in Urban Planning 1952). 



Duhart’s first commissions were in relation to the Chillán earthquake (1939) reconstruction, and he worked mainly in rural housing as part of the Help and Reconstruction Corporation initiatives (1941). He belonged to a group of architects that went abroad at the time, and he imported foreign ideas and modes of architectural production to Chile; the other two main modes of foreign influence were architectural publications and external visitors to the country. From 1951 he taught at the Catholic University, becoming Director of the Institute of Urbanism, Housing and Planning. 



A prolific architect, Duhart’s main work developed in the second half of the twentieth century, mainly devoted to educational buildings, private housing, and industrial plants. Highlights are the Jardín del Este urbanisation and the Carozzi industrial complex. His works also include more extensive projects; such is the case of the urban zoning regulation plan in Concepción (1957-1962) and the campus of the same city's university. Duhart understood the urban project as a large-scale building, taking the human scale as the unit of territorial measure.



File: Duhart_zoning_regulation_plan.jpg

Figure 3: Zoning regulation plan in Concepción. <http://www.plataformaarquitectura.cl/2010/04/13/desenlace-del-instituto-de-quimica-de-emilio-duhart-en-concepcion/>.

The United Nations Building in Santiago, which serves as headquarters to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) (in Spanish, Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe [CEPAL]), has been considered a landmark of modern architecture and a referent of the movement in Chile and internationally, as well. Located in Vitacura, in the riverbed of the Mapocho river, the building was inaugurated in 1966 and was designed in association with the architects Christian de Groote and Roberto Goycolea. Duhart asserted in his opening remarks for the competition entry that the complex ‘resembles both a house and a monument. This house of the nations represents a sharing with the community, while the monument is a visible expression of the nation’s social and spiritual aspirations.’ This government’s commission represents a general attitude of embracement of modern architecture as an efficient mode of promoting the image of a progressive nation. The investment in city planning and public buildings (schools, universities, hospitals, and social housing) was part of a strategy for the diffusion of republican ideals, an image of modernity.



In 1961, Duhart established himself back in France, where he eventually died in 1988. He designed the Comodoro Arturo Merino Benítez airport in Santiago (1992) from afar, receiving the Architectural National Award in 1977 for his trajectory.



File: Duhart_CEPAL_building.jpg

Figure 4: ECLAC (CEPAL) building. Emilio Duhart Collection. Originals Archive, FADEU, Catholic University, Chile.

Selected List of Works:

Rosa Labbé de Mendez House (1941)

Francisco Pinto Santa Cruz House (1945)

Duhart House (1948)

Mercedes Larraín Vial House (1948)

Colegio del Verbo Divino (1950)

Echeverría House in Zapallar (1953)

Plaza de Armas Building (1955)

Zoning Regulation Plan of Concepción and University Campus (1957-1962)

Seminario Pontificio (1957-1962)

Hostería Castro and Hostería Ancud (1957-1962)

Jardín del Este urbanization (1957-1962)

Capilla Colegio Verbo Divino (1957-1962)

Alliance Français high school (1961)

Carozzi industrial complex (1961)

The United Nations Building in Santiago (1960-1966)

Biblioteca Central Universidad de Concepcion (1971)

Airport the International Commodore Merino Arthur Benitez (1992)

Further reading:

 (Eliash and Moreno)



(Montealegre, Emilio Duhart, arquitecto)



(Montealegre and Altikes, Emilio Duhart Harosteguy: Procesos de cambio)



(Pérez Oyarzun, Pérez de Arce and Torrent) 


(The Sergio Larraín García-Moreno Center of Information and Documentation, Catholic University)