

Robert Duncan was an American poet, dramatist, and critic central to the San Francisco Renaissance and Black Mountain College. He was born Edward Howard Duncan Jr., renamed Robert Edward Symmes by his Theosophist adoptive parents. He published as Robert Symmes in his early works and finally combined his names to form Robert Duncan in 1941 after his military discharge. After seven years in North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and New York, Duncan returned to California in 1945 and remained in the Bay Area until his death in 1988 of kidney disease.

Robert Duncan was an American poet, dramatist, and critic central to the San Francisco Renaissance and Black Mountain College. He was born Edward Howard Duncan Jr., renamed Robert Edward Symmes by his Theosophist adoptive parents. He published as Robert Symmes in his early works and finally combined his names to form Robert Duncan in 1941 after his military discharge. After seven years in North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and New York, Duncan returned to California in 1945 and remained in the Bay Area until his death in 1988 of kidney disease.



Duncan first began writing poetry seriously during his undergraduate studies at the University of California, Berkeley, and he became connected to international literary networks after joining James Cooney’s commune in Woodstock, New York, where he worked on the journal The Phoenix. Henry Miller and Lawrence Durrell were both contributors to the journal, and Duncan published both as well as Anais Nin in his own Experimental Review. He took part in a failed American publication of Miller’s Tropic of Cancer (1934) and attempted to publish two post-Surrealist books by Durrell. Duncan was by this time identifying with Anarchism. In 1941 he declared his homosexuality and was discharged from the military. He married two years later, but this failed quickly, and he published his seminal essay ‘The Homosexual in Society’ in Politics in 1944 after returning to San Francisco. As a consequence, John Crowe Ransom rejected Duncan’s ‘Toward an African Elegy’ for Kenyon Review and the work was later published in Circle in 1948, a journal closely affiliated with Miller that had already published his ‘The Years as Catches’ (1946). Bern Porter, co-editor of Circle, published Duncan’s first poetry collection Heavenly City, Earthly City (1947). Across his career, Duncan engaged deeply with modernist poetics, particularly the work of H. D. and Ezra Pound, but like the British New Apocalypse he included Romantic interests in the irrational and organic. Anarchism and the occult were also deep influences. His work is most closely associated with his contemporaries Kenneth Rexroth, Charles Olson, Jack Spicer, Robin Blaser, and Robert Creeley. In 1951, Duncan met the artist Jess Collins who was his partner until his death.



In the 1960s, Duncan’s most successful works appeared: The Opening of the Field (1960), Roots and Branches (1964), and Bending the Bow (1968). In these, his modernist interests are most overt, as are his anarchist refutations of the Vietnam War and formal and stylistic innovation. Shortly thereafter, Duncan’s break with the poet Denise Levertov expressed his changing views on poetry and its social uses, and his large project The H. D. Book (2011) grew across the 1970s. This book and the Levertov correspondence comprise the most important exposition of his poetics in prose. Duncan did not publish books of poetry again until Ground Work I: Before the War (1984), which won the national Poetry Award in 1985, and Ground Work II: In the Dark (1987), immediately prior to this death. The University of California Press published Duncan’s collected works between 2011 and 2014.



Key Works:

The Opening of the Field (1960)

Roots and Branches (1964)

The Years As Catches: First poems (1966)

Bending the Bow (1968)

Ground Work: Before the War (1984)

Ground Work II: In the Dark (1987)

The Collected Early Poems and Plays (2012)

The Collected Later Poems and Plays (2014)

Collected Essays and Other Prose (2014)

The H. D. Book (2011)

Further reading:

 (Duncan)



(Duncan and Levertov, The Letters of Robert Duncan and Denise Levertov)



(R. Duncan)



(Faas)



(Jarnot)