
Author: Ndiouga Benga

cole de Dakar

 L'cole de Dakar is a movement of artistic revival born in Senegal  at  the
beginning of independence, encouraged by  President  Lopold  Sdar  Senghor
(1960-1980). Senghors  project  of  "a  new  art  for  a  new  nation"  was
implemented by practitioners and teachers such as Iba Gustave Ndiaye  (1928-
2008), Papa Ibra Tall (1935-) and Pierre Andr Lods (1921-1989), founder  of
L'cole de Poto-Poto, in Brazzaville, in 1951. Born in the  School  of  Arts
based in Dakar in 1960, it included  a  visual  arts  section  and  a  black
plastics arts research section in 1961, to which carving and  tapestry  were
added in 1963 and 1964. L'cole de Dakar asserted itself at the First  World
Festival of Black Arts held in Dakar in 1966 and dominated the life  of  the
plastic arts in Senegal until 1980. Through an abundant artistic  production
presented at the Salon de  Dakar,  exhibitions  abroad  and  a  recognisable
style (plenty of features, lines,  signs  and  symbols,  cubic,  square  and
rectangular shapes) some forty artists  (including  three  women)  including
Ibou Diouf, Bocar Path Diongue, Abdoulaye Ndiaye, Amadou Ba,  Diatta  Seck,
Souleymane Keita, and Ansoumana Diedhiou trained during the sixties and  the
seventies. The cole de Dakar contributed to the modern arts of  Senegal  as
witness of a new art for  a  new  nation,  a  label  in  the  expression  of
Africanness at home and abroad.

The work produced by the members of the school reflected on  the  values  of
precolonial Africa with themes  related  to  representations  of  masks  and
statues, minds and spirits, authentic and old values  of  the  black  world,
and was inspired by the ideology of  Ngritude  (rootedness  and  openness).
They told, in a cosmopolitan way, the  tales  of  important  Senegalese  and
Panafrican,  historical,  political,  cultural  and  religious   heroes   or
commented on spiritual and ritual forces at work. The art  did  not  imitate
reality but favoured and  generated  suggestions,  significant  details  and
sketches that showed essence instead of  presenting  reality.  It  was  also
open to  techniques  and  modern  tools  of  creation,  to  the  fertilising
contributions of other peoples. L'cole de Dakar  has  been  marked  by  the
omnipresence of Lopold Sdar Senghor in terms of orientation and  patronage
on the one hand and on the  other  hand  by  options  and  tensions  of  its
animators.  Lcole de Dakar has been the subject of a lot of criticism  and
ultimately lost its aura after Senghor,  its  most  important  theorist  and
patron, withdrew from public life.









































Ansoumana Diedhiou, Afankarin (the sacred wood wise  man),  1980,  tapestry,
in Sylla, A., Seck, S. and Mbaye, M. (eds.) (unknown date)  Une  passion  en
couleurs. Art contemporain du Sngal, collection de Abdoulaye  Diop  et  de
Fatoumata Sow, Dakar: Imprimerie du Midi, p. 43


References and further reading

Samb, I. (2013) The Painters of the Dakar School. Les peintres de  lEcole
de Dakar, in Kouoh, K. (ed.) (2013) Word! Word?  Word!  Issa  Samb  and
the Undecipherable Form. Parole! Parole? Parole! Issa Samb  et  la  forme
indchiffrable,  Office  for  Contemporary  ArtNorway  Oslo,  Raw  Material
Company Dakar, Berlin: Sternberg Press : 115-121.

Seck, S.  (2003)  L'cole  de  Dakar,  ralit  historique  ou  escroquerie
intellectuelle?, Ethiopiques 70 (1): 29-45.

Senghor, L. S. (1964) Libert I. Ngritude et Humanisme, Paris: Seuil.

Snipe, T. (1998) Arts and Politics  in  Senegal  1960-1996,  Asmara-Trenton:
Africa World Press.

Sylla, A. (1998) Arts plastiques et Etat  au  Sngal.  Trente-cinq  ans  de
mcnat au Sngal, Dakar: Institut Fondamental dAfrique Noire-Cheikh  Anta
Diop.

Sylla, A., Seck, S. and Mbaye, M.  (eds.)  (unknown  date)  Une  passion  en
couleurs. Art contemporain du Sngal, collection de Abdoulaye  Diop  et  de
Fatoumata Sow, Dakar: Imprimerie du Midi.






