El Guindi, Yussef (1960-    )






http://www.wilmatheater.org/production/language-rooms/artists/665





Yussef El Guinid is an Egyptian/Arab American playwright. He was born in Egypt, educated in London and is currently a resident of Seattle, USA. He received his B.A. degree from the American University in Cairo and MFA in Playwriting from Carnegie-Mellon University. He writes about cultural and political collisions of ethnic minorities, especially Arab-Americans. Most of his plays are about Arab-American trying to fit in the American way of life and some of the clashes that arise as a result.



 One of his notable plays is Back of the Throat (2005), a play about a young Arab American who is subjected to government scrutiny and visited by two government agents after a terrorist attack. El Guinid brings to the foreground racial profiling and the terror that gripped America in the wake of 9/11 terrorist attack. He mixes humour with surrealism when he employs flashback technique.  Jihad Jones and the Kalashnikov Babes (2009) is about an Arab-American actor who has to choose between his ethics and the lure of fame and money as he plays a terrorist in a movie and struggles with Hollywood stereotypes. In Language Rooms (2010), an Arab American who works as translator at a high-security detention center begins to suspect that he himself is under surveillance. Expressionistic technique also colours this play, particularly the dream sequences.



El Guindi’s plays are often thought-provoking yet full of witty sarcasm to lighten the tone as he frequently blends humour with his subject matter. His play Pilgrim Musa and Sheri in the New World (2011) won the Steinberg/American Theatre Critics Award and was the recipient of the 2010 Middle East America Distinguished Playwright Award. Inspired by the Arab Spring, The Mummy and the Revolution (2012) El Guindi’s latest, is a farce with the recent Egyptian Revolution as a backdrop. 



Key works:

Back of the Throat (2005)

Such a Beautiful Voice is Sayeda’s and Karima’s City adapted from Salwa Bakr’s short stories.



Jihad Jones and the Kalashnikov Babes (2009)

Language Rooms (2010)

Pilgrim Musa and Sheri in the New World (2011)

The Mummy and the Revolution (2012)



Sally Hammouda