

One of the founders of the surrealist movement, Paul Éluard’s poetry is often mistakenly classified as solely belonging to this style. It is only the first period of Éluard’s work, however, that can be thus defined. The second period is characterized by a more formally restrained poetic style and is expressive of a renewed interest in accessibility to the reader. This period was one of political activism, in which Éluard, breaking with the surrealists, was a central figure in the French Resistance and active member of the communist party. 



Born Eugène Grindel to Bourgeois parents, Éluard would go on to lead a tumultuous emotional and political life.   Married three times, Éluard’s poems are interlaced by themes of love, loss and renewal.  While his first important book Le devoir et l’inquiétude is published in 1917, it is the 1926, Capitale de la douleur (Capital of Pain), inspired by his wife Gala’s desertion of him, that establishes his reputation. Much of his work between the years of 1926 until her sudden death in 1946, is dedicated to his second wife Nusch. Éluard would himself die shortly after his third marriage to Dominique Laure.

One of the founders of the surrealist movement, Paul Éluard’s poetry is often mistakenly classified as solely belonging to this style. It is only the first period of Éluard’s work, however, that can be thus defined. The second period is characterized by a more formally restrained poetic style and is expressive of a renewed interest in accessibility to the reader. This period was one of political activism, in which Éluard, breaking with the surrealists, was a central figure in the French Resistance and active member of the communist party. 



Born Eugène Grindel to Bourgeois parents, Éluard would go on to lead a tumultuous emotional and political life.   Married three times, Éluard’s poems are interlaced by themes of love, loss and renewal.  While his first important book Le devoir et l’inquiétude is published in 1917, it is the 1926, Capitale de la douleur (Capital of Pain), inspired by his wife Gala’s desertion of him, that establishes his reputation. Much of his work between the years of 1926 until her sudden death in 1946, is dedicated to his second wife Nusch. Éluard would himself die shortly after his third marriage to Dominique Laure.

Further reading:



(Dumas and Scheler)



(Kallet)



(Nugent)



(Parrot and Marcenac)



(Perche)



(Scott)