
 Elytis, Odysseus  (1911-1996)

For me the Aegean is not merely a part of nature, but rather a kind of
signature, Odysseus Elytis suggested in a 1972 interview with Ivar and
Astrid Ivask, I and my generation - and here I include SEFERIS - have
attempted to find the true face of Greece. This was necessary because until
then the true face of Greece was presented as Europeans saw Greece. In
order to achieve this task we had to destroy the tradition of rationalism
which lay heavily on the Western world. Hence the great appeal of
SURREALISM for us the moment it appeared on the literary scene. (Odysseus
Elytis on His Poetry) Adapting SURREALISM in a Greek way, the 1979 Nobel
laureate formed a kind of alphabet out of purely Greek elements with
which to express himself, a method of apprehending the world through the
senses (Odysseus Elytis on His Poetry).

      Born Odysseas Alepoudhelis in Crete in 1911, of parents originally
hailing from the island of Lesbos, Elytis moved with his family to Piraeus
in 1914 and published his first poem in 1935 in the journal Nea Grammata
founded by a circle of GREEK MODERNIST writers and critics, including
Giorgos Katsimbalis, GEORGE SEFERIS and George Theotokas. Alongside fellow
poets Andreas Embirikos, Nikos Engonopoulos, Nikos Gatsos and Miltos
Sahtouris, he experimented with SURREALISM and produced poetry with the
architectural symmetry of a Euclidean linear drawing (1979 Swedish
Academy Ceremony Speech). His first collection of poems, Orientations
(1939), was succeeded by two collections, Sun the First (1943) and Song
Heroic and Mourning for the Lost Second Lieutenant of the Albanian Campaign
(1946) drawing on his wartime experience when he served as a second
lieutenant on the Albanian front in the Second World War. 1959 was the year
of the seminal To Axion Esti, which was set to music by Mikis Theodorakis
in 1964, while both his writing and painting career (influenced by MAX
ERNSTs technique of collage as well as the style of YVES TANGUY and Oscar
Domnguez) continued well into the 1990s; he produced seventeen poetry
collections and two volumes of essays, the latter covering a period from
1938 to 1995. While in Paris in the late Forties, he met PABLO PICASSO,
HENRI MATISSE, FERNARD LGER, ALBERTO GIACOMETTI, JEAN-PAUL SARTRE and
ALBERT CAMUS, artists that influenced his work, along with that of French
poet PAUL LUARD, with whose writing he had become acquainted early in his
career and which he translated.

In his poetry he sought to create an analogy particular to Greece, one that
would link the countrys geography to language, and so in his work he was
interested in the Mediterranean as an alternative modernist space open to
the metaphysics of light and what he called the meteorism of objects and
figures that always want to rise higher (Odysseus Elytis on His Poetry).
Elytiss poems are marked by forms that correspond with the content of the
poem while his theory of analogies was influenced by CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
GASTON BACHELARD and FREUD. I consider poetry a source of innocence full
of revolutionary forces, he said, It is my mission to direct these forces
against a world my conscience cannot accept, precisely so as to bring that
world through continual metamorphoses more in harmony with my dreams.
(Odysseus Elytis on His Poetry)

List of Works

Elytis, Odysseus (1997, 2004) The Complete Poems, Revised and Expanded
Edition, trans Jeffrey Carson and Nikos Sarris, Baltimore, Maryland: The
John Hopkins University Press.

Elytis, Odysseus (2007)The Axion Esti, trans.Edmund KeeleyandGeorge
Savidis, London:Anvil Press Poetry.

Elytis, Odysseus (1999) Carte Blanche: Selected Writings, trans. David
Connolly, Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers.

Elytis, Odysseus (1998) Eros, Eros, Eros: Selected and Last Poems, trans
Olga Broumas, Port Townsend: Copper Canyon Press.

Elytis, Odysseus (1995)Open Papers, trans.Olga Broumas andT. Begley,
Port Townsend, Washington:Copper Canyon Press.

References and Further Reading

Award Ceremony Speech, Nobelprize.org,
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1979/presentatio
n-speech.html

Ivask, Ivar, ed. (1975) Odysseus Elytis: Analogies of Light, Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Ivask, Ivar and Astrid Ivask (1972) Odysseus Elytis on His Poetry, Books
Abroad, 49:4 (Autumn), 631-645.

Pourgouris, Marinos (2008) Odysseus Elytis (1911-1996), Dictionary of
Literary Biography: Nobel Prize Laureates in Literature. Vol. 329, New
York: Thomson Gale, 422-429.

Pourgouris, Marinos (2011) Mediterranean Modernisms: The Poetic Metaphysics
of Odysseus Elytis, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing.

Stabakis, Nikos, ed. (2008)Surrealism in Greece: An Anthology,
Austin:University of Texas Press.

Konstantina Georganta





