
Expanded Cinema

Gloria Galindo (University of California-Santa Barbara)

Within the ferment of the 1960s underground cinema emerged what critic
Sheldon Renan described as a whole new area of film and film-like art
characterized by the combination of film with other media and with
performance, and labelled expanded cinema by some of its practitioners,
among them experimental filmmakers Carolee Schneemann and Stan VanDerBeek.
Expanded cinema was theorised by Renan himself and, most notably, by Los
Angeles-based critic Gene Youngblood in Expanded Cinema, the most thorough
treatment of the phenomenon.

Expanded cinema integrates into the cinematic event new artistic
techniques, media, and processes, bursting apart the self-containment of
the traditional screening situation. In this respect, expanded cinema can
be regarded as a further evolution of such early twentieth-century
developments as the Futurist concerts or the legendary Dada performances at
Cabaret Voltaire in Zurich  attempts to create total, all-involving works
of art that combined various media and disregarded the organic unity of the
traditional work of art. For its part, expanded cinema broadened the
definition of what film could be by combining it with cutting-edge
technologies, including video and computer graphics. The innovative
cinematographic and cinematic devices of expanded cinema included the use
of multiple projectors; the use of computer-generated images (as the ones
designed by John Whitney on IBM equipment); the electronic manipulation of
images on television; the integration of filmic projection in light shows;
and, at times, even live shadow plays that reproduced the look of film.
Additional ingredients of the media-mix or cinema-combine include live
performers, dance, painting, and other media (Renan 228). As an aesthetic
phenomenon, expanded cinema is one more example of the varied cross-media
experiments of the 1960s. Renan, in addition, sees in this development a
compelling reflection on the temporality of the image and the ephemerality
of light as cinematic support (Renan 104). He also defines expanded cinema
as deflated cinema, that is, a form of cinema from which everything has
been removed, keeping only its essential components, such as light running
through the projector, or the alternating black and white frames used in
stroboscopic style films. In his view, expanded cinema is not the name of
a particular style of filmmaking; instead, it can be defined as a spirit
of inquiry that is leading  to the point at which the effect of film may
be produced without the use of film at all (227).

For Gene Youngblood, expanded cinema does not mean computer films, video
phosphors, atomic light, or spherical projections; it actually implies an
expanded consciousness that tries to grasp life as a process of
becoming. Drawing on the terminology of media theorist Marshall McLuhan,
who was at the height of his popularity in the mid and late 1960s, he
characterized expanded cinema as an on-going historical drive to manifest
 consciousness outside of [the] mind. A pervasive feeling among artists
and theorists at the time was that it proved no longer possible to express
a clear picture of ones relationships to ones surroundings by devoting
oneself to a single discipline. This is especially true in the case of the
inter-media network of cinema and television, which now functions as
nothing less than the nervous system of mankind (Youngblood 41). Expanded
cinema sought to modify the spectators perceptual habits by questioning
the habitual relation between time and space, and offering at the same time
an alternative understanding of artistic practice; it tried to offer a
context within which human beings could come to terms with their own senses
and arrive at a better understanding of themselves and their environment.

Renan concludes that expanded cinema may be considered a fourth avant-
garde: . . . many of the underground film-makers are working in this
area. But avant-garde/experimental/ underground film is only one of the
sources of expanded cinema. What has changed cinema to expanded cinema has
been nothing less than the development of whole new conditions and
sensibilities spreading across all the arts (228). Commonly cited pioneers
of expanded cinema include filmmakers who experimented with multiple-screen
projection, such as such as Stan VanDerBeek, Andy Warhol, and Barbara
Rubin, along with others who integrated film with video and other media,
such as the USCO (Us Company), David Hall, Steina Vasulka, Nina Sobel, and
Joan Jonas, among others.

Expanded cinema has survived well beyond the 1960s. Isaac Juliens ten-
screen installation Ten Thousand Waves (2010), for example, is a
contemporary descendant of the form, as are Fiona Tans Saint Sebastian
(2001), about a coming-of-age-day ritual in Kyoto, Japan; and Yang Fudongs
The Fifth Night (2010), filmed with seven 35mm cameras running
simultaneously, each positioned at a different angle and using different
lenses. In addition, the projector performances of Luis Recoder and Sandra
Gibson are, according to Joan Hawkins, among the most inspired and
inventive examples of contemporary expanded cinema; they make full use of
the optical and mechanical qualities of film projection in order to
transform the projection room into a sensual three-dimensional space.

For its cross-media vocation and its destabilisation and dematerialization
of the traditional art object, expanded cinema is an important development
in the deconstruction of high modernism.


References and Further Readings

About Expanded Cinema. Instant Cinema:
http://preview.instantcinema.org/expandedcinema
Curtis, David, Al Rees, et al. (2011). Expanded Cinema: Art, Performance,
Film. London: Tate Publishing.

Expanded Cinema: A Bibliography. Center for Visual Music:
http://www.centerforvisualmusic.org/ExpCinBiblio.html

Hawkins, Joan (2013). Expanded Cinema. The Ryder:
http://theryder.com/2013/08/30/expanded-cinema-3/

Renan, Shelton (1967). An Introduction to the American Underground Film.
New York: Dutton Paperbacks.
http://archive.org/details/introductiontoam00rena

Youngblood, Gene (1970). Expanded Cinema. New York: Dutton Paperbacks.
http://www.vasulka.org/Kitchen/PDF_ExpandedCinema/book.pdf

Paratextual Materials:

Expanded Cinema and Video Art: Tate Video and Essays from REWIND (Cubitt,
Atherton, Hatfield): http://filmstudiesforfree.blogspot.dk/2009/08/expanded-
cinema-and-video-art-tate.html
Expanded Cinema: http://expandedcinema.blogspot.dk/
Naro Expanded Cinema: http://www.narocinema.com/
Narrative Exploration in Expanded Cinema:
http://www.rewind.ac.uk/expanded/Narrative/Home.html
Stan Vanderbeek: http://www.stanvanderbeek.com/
the warhol: http://www.warhol.org/


[pic]
Stan VanDerBeek: from Movie-Drome  (1963-66/2012)


