

Fascist Modernism is an artistic and literary movement emphasizing extreme nationalism, romantic anti-capitalism, and cultural renewal most closely associated with Fascist Italy, Vichy France, and National Socialist Germany (see Nazi Modernism), but also describes the fusion of innovative literary technique and reactionary politics found in the writings of leading American, English, and Irish Modernist authors such as T. S. Eliot, D. H. Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis, Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein, and W. B. Yeats.

Fascist Modernism is an artistic and literary movement emphasizing extreme nationalism, romantic anti-capitalism, and cultural renewal most closely associated with Fascist Italy, Vichy France, and National Socialist Germany (see Nazi Modernism), but also describes the fusion of innovative literary technique and reactionary politics found in the writings of leading American, English, and Irish Modernist authors such as T. S. Eliot, D. H. Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis, Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein, and W. B. Yeats.

Fascist Italy

In founding Futurism in 1909, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti called for ‘incendiary violence’ that would rouse Italy from its complacent nostalgia and destroy all of the cultural institutions—museums, monuments, and universities—that ‘stank of the past’. Marinetti challenged the youth of the nation to reject a debilitating identification with the glories of ancient Rome and instead to work for the realization of a ‘new Italy’ that was thoroughly industrialized and bristling with skyscrapers, aeroplanes, and automobiles of ‘eternal and omnipresent velocity’. He sang the praises of the ‘hygiene of war’, invoked the ‘beauty of battle’, and insisted upon the primacy of emotion and intuition over ratiocination and bourgeois morality. Futurism asserted an aesthetic of speed, violence, and iconoclasm. In 1923 Marinetti hailed the coming to power of Mussolini’s Fascist Party as the realization of ‘the minimum Futurist program’, which he described as embodying ‘every day heroism, love of danger, violence rehabilitated as a decisive argument, the glorification of war, sole hygiene of the world, the religion of speed, of novelty, optimism, originality’, and the intervention of the young at a time of grave crisis in the life of the nation. Leading Italian artists associated with Fascist Modernism, whose work was distinguished by a neo-classical, at times monumentalist ‘return to order’, and who contributed to the 1932 Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution (La mostra della Rivoluzione fascista del 1932) include Mario Sironi, Enrico Prampolini, Gerardo Dottori, Adalberto Libera, and Giuseppe Terragni. Others whose work embodied the fusion of Modernist technique and Fascist iconography are Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severino, Tullio di Albisola, Thayaht [Ernesto Michahelles], and Renato Bertelli.



Vichy France

In France artistic organizations and cultural figures aligned with political parties on the right (the Popular Front as well as various Catholic, reactionary, monarchist, anti-Capitalist, romantic pastoralist, and anti-Semitic splinter groups) saw themselves gain cultural ascendency over their leftist avant-garde peers following the successful German invasion in 1940 and the onset of the Vichy government’s policy of collaboration. Long-standing ties between like-minded artists in France and Nazi Germany (forged in cultural exchanges like that of the 1937 Berlin exhibition, Französische Kunst der Gegenwart) were thereby strengthened. Among the most important of these connections was that between the modernizing neo-classicist French sculptors Charles Despiau and Aristide Maillol and the German sculptor (and Hitler favorite) Arno Breker, and the French Modernist architect Le Corbusier and his German teacher, Peter Behrens. Some of the most famous French painters of the early twentieth century, such as André Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck, leaders of FAUVISM, joined artists like Francis Picabia (associated with Dada and SURREALISM) in supporting the Vichy regime and adjusting their style to create a French variant of Nazi iconography. A number of prominent young Modernist writers (former Dadaists, nihilists, and futurists as well as reactionary nationalists) supported the Vichy policy of collaboration with the Nazi occupation, including Robert Brasillach, Louis-Ferdiand Céline, Henri Petit, Marguerite Duras, Lucien Rebatet, Pierre Drieu la Rochelle, Charles Maurras (founder of the Action Français), and the multi-talented Jean Cocteau. Controversially, the influential American expatriate writer Gertrude Stein signaled her sympathy with the Vichy regime by translating dozens of speeches by Maréchal Philippe Pétain for the purpose of publishing them in the United States.



Further reading:

(Antliff)

(Ben-Ghiat)

(Griffin)

(Stone)

(Will)