

William Faulkner was one of the best-known American authors of the twentieth century. Experimenting with form, chronology, and language, Faulkner developed a strikingly personal style while exploring the complexities of life in the American South. He was especially interested in crafting stories that explored the effects of the Civil War’s destruction and the ways in which it revealed the breakdown of plantation-based aristocracy, the effects of the exaggerated chivalric code of the Old South, and the complex racism of a society once based on slavery. He is most famous for novels such as Absalom, Absalom!, Light in August, The Sound and the Fury, Sanctuary, and As I Lay Dying. Many of his novels are set in fictional Yoknapatahpha County, a county of his own design that resembled his own birthplace, Lafayette County. A native of Oxford, Mississippi, Faulkner lived most of his life there; he also joined the Canadian Air Force during World War I and spent time in Hollywood later in his career writing screenplays. He struggled with alcoholism throughout his life, but eventually died from a heart attack following a fall from his horse.

William Faulkner was one of the best-known American authors of the twentieth century. Experimenting with form, chronology, and language, Faulkner developed a strikingly personal style while exploring the complexities of life in the American South. He was especially interested in crafting stories that explored the effects of the Civil War’s destruction and the ways in which it revealed the breakdown of plantation-based aristocracy, the effects of the exaggerated chivalric code of the Old South, and the complex racism of a society once based on slavery. He is most famous for novels such as Absalom, Absalom!, Light in August, The Sound and the Fury, Sanctuary, and As I Lay Dying. Many of his novels are set in fictional Yoknapatahpha County, a county of his own design that resembled his own birthplace, Lafayette County. A native of Oxford, Mississippi, Faulkner lived most of his life there; he also joined the Canadian Air Force during World War I and spent time in Hollywood later in his career writing screenplays. He struggled with alcoholism throughout his life, but eventually died from a heart attack following a fall from his horse.



File: Faulkner.jpg

Figure 1 William Faulkner

[[Source: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-galenson/impossible-dreams-william_b_6817658.html]]





Born William Falkner to Maud Butler and Murry Falkner in New Albany, Mississippi, Faulkner became a resident of Oxford, Mississippi in 1902. An exceptional student, Faulkner aspired to be a writer like his grandfather, skipped a grade, and read the poetry of Pound, Yeats, and Eliot as a young man. His early years were shaped by a meeting with Estelle Oldham, who would later go on to marry a friend of his and leave him brokenhearted. In 1918, he joined the Canadian Royal Air Force in hopes of making his way into World War I. Despite the fact that he never saw active duty, Faulkner, who had added the ‘U’ to his name to sound more British, often walked with a limp and told war stories upon returning home. He worked as a postmaster, a Boy Scouts scoutmaster, and a bank bookkeeper after dropping out of the University of Mississippi in 1920. After traveling in Europe and eventually marrying the divorced Estelle, he returned to Mississippi to buy the estate Rowan Oak. 



While he did publish some poems earlier in his career, Faulkner’s first novel, Soldier’s Pay, did not appear until 1926. During the 1930’s, Faulkner struggled with alcohol abuse and suffered the death of a daughter, Alabama, his father, Murry, and his younger brother, Dylan. During that time, he also published As I Lay Dying, Light in August, Pylon, Absalom, Absalom!, The Unvanquished, and The Wild Palms. From the 1930s to the 1950s, Faulkner worked intermittently for MGM, Fox, and Warner Brothers as a screenwriter, spending time in Hollywood and meeting Meta Carpenter, with whom he would have a fifteen-year affair. 



The Sound and the Fury (1929) developed the distinctive voice and uniquely personal style that makes Faulkner a major contributor to the history of modernism. The novel, which resists traditional plot summary, tells the stories of the Compson brothers’ relationship to their sister Caddy. As I Lay Dying (1930) furthered Faulkner’s intensely personal, fragmented narrative style, narrativizing the different perspectives of the members of the poor, uneducated, white Bundren family.  Sanctuary (1931) continued Faulkner’s interest in telling the tales of ignoble characters, chronicling the criminal activities of a group of men and the rape of Temple Drake.



Faulkner is also notable for his creation of an interconnected web that is often set in the fictional Yoknapatawpha County, a place of his own design, which served as the setting for many of this works. Many of his works included at least some reference to a group of characters that are part of the interconnected Faulknerian narrative — the Sutpens, Coldfields, Compsons, Sartorises dominated the landscape of his works. As characters and stories were connected between works, Faulkner clearly entered the realm of metafiction, challenging narrative’s capacity for consistency and self-reference.



Faulkner’s works reflected many quintessentially American themes, while often illustrating a uniquely Southern perspective. His writing often engages with issues of race, incest, class, family, all mediated by the effects of the Civil War. While Light in August (1932) also dealt with the plight of the poor inhabitants of the South, it suggested that this racially charged environment was especially hostile to those of mixed race, like the novel’s Joe Christmas, who meets a violent end at the hands of an angry mob. Absalom, Absalom! (1936) developed the unique, stream-of-consciousness style narration for which Faulkner is famous. Following the disastrous consequences of Thomas Sutpen’s attempt to build a dynasty, the novel focused on the ill-fated relationships between Sutpen’s legitimate son and daughter and his son from an extramarital affair with a woman of mixed race. It also complicated the issue of narration by having characters retell the same stories from different perspectives, illustrating the importance of collective history. Set in the days before and after the Civil War, the novel challenged the reader to confront the repercussions of incestuous and interracial relationships as well as the class issues that followed breakdown of the Old South’s aristocracy after the Civil War eradicated the slave labor that empowered it.



Faulkner was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature (1950) the National Book Award for Fiction (1951), and the Gold Medal for Fiction from the national Institute of Arts and Letters (1962).



CHRONOLOGY OF ALL WORKS

1919 – ‘L’Apres-Midi d’un Faune’ (poem)

1920 – The Marionettes (play)

1921 – Vision in Spring (poems, gift to Estelle)

1924 – The Marble Faun

1926 – Soldiers’ Pay

1927 – Mosquitoes

1929 – Sartoris

	The Sound and the Fury

1930 – As I Lay Dying

1931 – Sanctuary

	These 13

1932 – Light in August

1934 – Doctor Martino and Other Stories

1935 – Pylon

1936 – Absalom, Absalom!

1938 – The Unvanquished

1939 – The Wild Palms

1940 – The Hamlet

1942 – Go Down, Moses

1948 – Intruder in the Dust

1949 – Knight’s Gambit

1950 – Collected Stories

1951 – Requiem for a Nun

1954 – A Fable

1955 – Big Woods

1957 – The Town

1959 – The Mansion

1962 – The Reivers



Further reading:

KEY BIOGRAPHIES OF WILLIAM FAULKNER

(Blotner)

(Oates)

(Parini)