
FEDERAL THEATRE PROJECT (1935-1939)

The Federal Theatre Project was a government-subsidized program established
in 1935 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to provide jobs for theatre
artists during the Great Depression in the United States. Along with
similar programs in Art, Music, Dance, and Writing, the project was
designed to produce professional theatre throughout the country and
eventually established companies in thirty-one American states. While the
fare of the program was broad, including circuses, vaudeville, musicals,
and childrens theatre, its offerings were largely progressive, which led
to conflicts with Congressional Republicans who viewed the program as
propaganda for New Deal politics. Eventually, charges of communism led to
an investigation by the House Committee on Un-American Activities and the
budgetary elimination of Federal Theatre in 1939.

As a part of the Works Progress Administration (WPA), Federal Theatre was
supervised by Harry Hopkins and administered by Hallie Flanagan Davis, who
had been a classmate of Hopkins at Grinnell College and who had established
a very successful experimental theatre at Vassar College. Flanagan insisted
that the program be free, adult and uncensored (Arena, 28), and that its
theatres reflect the entirety of the American people, as well as the
serious economic and political threats that confronted them. She undertook
the establishment, for example, of several Negro theatres (in Harlem,
Newark, Chicago, and Seattle) that produced plays about black experience in
the United States during a decade when race riots and public lynchings were
not uncommon. These theatres were controversial and did not prosper in the
Deep South, but they contributed to the body of work popularized during the
Harlem Renaissance and encouraged dozens of African American writers,
designers, composers, and performers to pursue careers in the theatre. One
of Federal Theatre Projects most celebrated productions was a voodoo
Macbeth (1936) that was directed by Orson Welles and set in Haiti with an
all-black cast.


While the predominant style of Federal Theatre was traditional and
frequently realistic, an important exception was the Living Newspaper unit,
which produced socially relevant plays on current political topics such as
subsidized housing (One-Third of a Nation, 1938), socialized medicine
(Spirochete, 1938), and public ownership of utilities (Power, 1937). These
productions were influenced by Russian and German models and experimented
with both epic and expressionistic devices. A typical Living Newspaper
production utilized a narrator, short scenes with characters that
represented ideas and attitudes rather than psychological complexity, and
direct address to the audience. Injunction Granted (1936), for example, was
clearly inspired by the Russian director Nikolai Ohklopkov. Its open stage
with circles of platforms and a dozen designated playing areas reflected
staging and design concepts that director Joseph Losey had seen in Vsevolod
Meyerholds and Ohklopkovs theatres in Moscow, and its clown figure, who
comments ironically on the action of the play, combines with a loudspeaker
voice to break through the traditional fourth wall. Unfortunately, the
plays enthusiastic endorsement of the Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO) led to charges of communism that not only forced an early closing of
Injunction Granted but ultimately led to the termination of the entire
Federal Theatre Project. During its brief tenure, however, the project
staged several remarkable productions, including The Cradle Will Rock
(1937), It Cant Happen Here (1936), and Prologue to Glory (1938), and
introduced many artists, including Orson Welles, John Houseman, and Rose
McClendon, who made significant contributions to American theatre.

List of Works

De Rohan, Pierre, ed. (1938) Federal Theatre Plays, New York: Random House.

References and Further Reading

Cobb, Gerry. (1990) Injunction Granted in Its Times: a Living Newspaper
Reappraised, New Theatre Quarterly 6 (23): 279-296.

Flanagan, Hallie. (1940) Arena, New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce.

Fraden, Rena. (1994) Blueprints for a Black Federal Theatre, 1935-1939, New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Mathews, Jane. (1967) The Federal Theatre Project, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
New Deal Programs: Selected Library of Congress Resources: Federal Theatre
Project, <http://www.loc.gov/rr/program/bib/newdeal/ftp.html>.
Osborne, Elizabeth A. (2011) Staging the People: Community and Identity in
the Federal Theatre Project, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Witham, Barry B. (2003) The Federal Theatre Project: A Case Study, New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Barry B. Witham, University of Washington


Recommended Illustrations
[Please use film footage plus two illustrations if possible]


Original footage of Orson Welless voodoo Macbeth (1936).
[Available at: http://www.filmpreservation.org/preserved-films/screening-
room/voodoo-macbeth]
[Also available at: www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xa9Mjfr5foY]
[If its not possible to use this footage, please let us know as there are
still photographs of this production that could be used instead, but it
would be great to use the film footage, so please try for that.]

[pic]

Injunction Granted, Living Newspaper, Federal Theatre Project, 1936.
[Reproduced in Lorraine Brown, Federal Theatre: Melodrama, Social Protest,
and Genius, which is linked to the Library of Congress webpage listed
above. The article is at http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/fedtp/ftbrwn00.html;
the photo is at http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/fedtp/images/ftbrwn07.jpg]




[pic]

Poster for Power, Federal Theatre Project, 1937.
[Available at George Mason University Libraries:
http://digilib.gmu.edu/dspace/handle/1920/4017]
