
Atta Kwami

AMPOFO, Oku AMPOFO (1908-1998) 

Oku Ampofo, a significant sculptor in Ghanaian modernism, was also a
medical practitioner. Ampofo was born in Mampong, Akwapim in Ghana. His
father Chief Kwesi Ampofo, founded the village of Amanase and started the
first school there. Ampofo attended the Swiss School at Anum and proceeded
to Mfantsipim School in 1926-1929; Ampofo attended Achimota to train as a
tTeacher, reading Inter-Arts at the same time. However the first award of a
Gold Coast medical scholarship was made available and he switched to
Science, undertaking part of his training locally before travelling in 1932
to Edinburgh to study medicine. There he took evening art classes
privately. Ampofo re-discovered the power of African art displayed in
galleries and museums abroad. Ampofo completed his studiesy in Europe with
a continental tour of great collections of African art at the Tervuren,
The British Museum, and Musee Muse de lHomme. Ampofo was also the
founder of the first modern art society, The Akwapim Six. Ampofo sought
to impart his new vision of art through this society. A significant
modernist, he became the Chair of the Ghana InstitueInstitute for Art and
Culture and the first president of The Arts Council of Ghana. Ampofo was an
important early influence in local modernist art education. In 1963, he
served as external examiner at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.

Ampofos talent and reputation won him state commissions in the 1950s and
1960s. Ampofos figural sculpture is characterised by expansive form, stark
and graceful lines with expressive faces His work embodied the artistic
processes of hybridity or a search for a sense of identity.

This confirms Sylvester Ogbechies notion that Contexts owe their
canonical forms to reciprocal appropriations engendered within an
international context of modernity. (Ogbechie 2008: 7).

Ampofos figural sculpture is characterised by expansive form, stark and
graceful lines andwith expressive faces. The resolution of Ampofos
modernist sculpture is defined by the limitations of the cylindrical form;
the form of the tree trunk played an important part in this. The figures
with a pots, or elaborate hair style and elongated necks with arms bending
backwards and upwards to support the pots represent - a physical
impossibility but an artistic solution which is totally credible. Ampofo
realised that the town crier or gong-gong beater is still the most
effective means of communication in Ghanaian society today. Ampofos talent
and reputation won him state commissions in the 1950s and 1960s.

Much of Ampofos work embodied the artistic processes of hybridity or a
search for a sense of identity.Ampofos modern cement and terrazzo work,
Struggle with Tragedy, 1955 is situated near the entrance to the National
Museum, Accra, Study of Three Market Women, 1958 was donated to the Arts
Council of Ghana after an exhibition at the Ambassador Hotel in 1960.
Artists such as Ampofo employed their skills and creativity towards
promoting a sense of national identity for Ghanaians whilst fostering the
idea of nationhood, selfhood or unity. This pertains to the notion put
forth by historian of African art, Sylvester Ogbechie,  that Contexts owe
their canonical forms to reciprocal appropriations engendered within an
international context of modernity.   AboutIn reference to Struggle with
Tragedy, Ampofo stated: In this kind of sculpture as in all cement and
terrazzo works, I build up the kind of figure I want in stages around iron
and wire amaturesarmatures placed horizontally on the ground. When the
basic structure is built, the figure is raised to stand, [] In this
figure, the raised arms around the head region is traditionally indicative
of sorrow or deprivation, misery or despondency.

(Ampofo 1988: 64) In 1991 Ampofo wrote that he  felt that creative art  in
Ghana was as important as political freedom and the two should  go  together
to establish our identity as people. (Ampofo 1991: 9).

In 1944 Ampofo organised the New African Art exhibition. Ampofo wrote
of the achievement and promise of his contemporaries whose works were
exhibited in 1945 in Ghana and in England in 1949. In 1946 Ampofo formed a
guild bringing together craftspeople and artists who were from the Akwapim
area to mount annual exhibitions (1948, 1950, 1955 and since 1961 under the
Ghana Institute of Art and Culture/The Arts Council of Ghana). The The
Akwapim Six society grew from six to over twelve memebersmembers,
representing a number of different art forms and practices.: John
Christopher Okyere (sculptor), F.A. Gyampo (painter), Cobblah (ceramicist),
A.A. Opoku (sculptor), J.D. Okae (painter), and Oku Ampofo (sculptor and
founder), E.A, Asare weaver, Alex Ofei-Aboagye, Adi Darko(ceramicist),
Emmanuel Owusu Dartey(painter), Charles Philips (painter), Comfort Anno-
Nyako (textile artist) and Teddy Awuah (painter). Other
associate members were: Prof. E.V. Asihene (painter-sculptor), Christopher
Agbolosu, (sculptor and textile artist). 

Ampofo served as external examiner at the Art Faculty, KNUST, Kumasi and
was important early influence in modern art education in Ghana, along with
Kofi Antubam, Ernest Victor Asihene, Vincent A. Kofi, Grace Salome Kwami,
K. Addo Osafo and Kate Ofori. Ampofo, also a practicing physician,
contributed the first written publications by a Ghanaian artist and wrote a
book, My Kind of Sculpture (1988), which acknowledged the work of
Christopher Agbolosu (b. 1940) as a collaborator.

He served on several governmental committees and represented Ghana abroad.
Ampofos wood sculptures, Asase Due (Mother Earth, Condolences to You),
inspired by the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, was donated to
the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C. He
served as the Chairman of the Arts Council of Ghana from 1969-72.Ampofos
He donated his cement Study of Three Market Women (1958) was donated to the
Arts Council of Ghana after an exhibition at the Ambassador Hotel in 1960.
Ampofo was received awarded the Grand Medal (GM) byfrom the Ghana
Government in 1968 and ; awarded an honorary the Degree of Doctor of
Letters (D.Litt) from , University of Ghana, in 1976.; Special
Entertainers Critics and Reviewers Association of Ghana (ECRAG) Laureate
Award for Excellence in Sculpture, 1990.



References and Ffurther reading:

Ampofo, Oku. First published 1988, this edition 1992. My Kind of Sculpture,
Akuapem; Presbyterian Press, Accra.

Fosu, Kojo. 1986, 1993. 20th Century of Art of Africa, Zaria: Gaskiya
Corporation, Accra: Artists Alliance (revised).

July, Robert. 1987. An African Voice: The Role of the Humanities in African
Independence, Duke University Press, Durham.




[pic]

Oku Ampofo,Study of a Market Woman, 2008.

(Carved by Christopher Agbolosu), teak, 92 cm

Collection of Atta Kwami and Pamela Clarkson

Photographed by Atta Kwami 2014.



[pic]

Oku Ampofo,[Untitled Head - symmetry], n.d.teak

46 x 16 x 8 cm

Collection of Atta Kwami and Pamela Clarkson

Photographed by Atta Kwami 2014.



[pic]

Is this another view of market woman?

Oku Ampofo,Study of a Market Woman, 2008.Side view.

(Carved by Christopher Agbolosu), teak, 92 cm

Collection of Atta Kwami and Pamela Clarkson

Photographed by Atta Kwami 2014.



?[pic]

Oku Ampofo,Struggle with Tragedy, 1955, terrazzo, 75.2 x 22.9 x 25.4 cm

National Museum of Ghana, Accra, Photographed by Atta Kwami 2013.



