

Experimental masterpiece by James Joyce, published in 1939. Joyce began writing it during 1923 and parts of it appeared under the title Work-in-Progress within literary periodicals, such as transition, and in pamphlet form. It has a reputation as the most difficult text of literary modernism. 



Joyce set out to write ‘a history of the world’ and much of the structure of the book derives from Italian philosopher and historian Giambatista Vico’s New Science (1725) which breaks down history into a series of cyclic phases. The final title, however, alludes to a Dublin street ballad about a builder who falls from a ladder: Tim Finnegan is aroused from unconsciousness when a drop of whisky touches his mouth during the wake organised by his family who think him dead. Joyce used this to allude to Viconian myths of fall and redemption or resurrection. Written during the early years of Irish independence and the Wake’s mythic re-cycling of history and literature also bears upon contemporary developments. The absence of apostrophe in the title is deliberate: although derived from ‘Finnegan’s Wake’, it also urges the Irish (Finnegans) to rise from their historical stupor.

Experimental masterpiece by James Joyce, published in 1939. Joyce began writing it during 1923 and parts of it appeared under the title Work-in-Progress within literary periodicals, such as transition, and in pamphlet form. It has a reputation as the most difficult text of literary modernism. 



Joyce set out to write ‘a history of the world’ and much of the structure of the book derives from Italian philosopher and historian Giambatista Vico’s New Science (1725) which breaks down history into a series of cyclic phases. The final title, however, alludes to a Dublin street ballad about a builder who falls from a ladder: Tim Finnegan is aroused from unconsciousness when a drop of whisky touches his mouth during the wake organised by his family who think him dead. Joyce used this to allude to Viconian myths of fall and redemption or resurrection. Written during the early years of Irish independence and the Wake’s mythic re-cycling of history and literature also bears upon contemporary developments. The absence of apostrophe in the title is deliberate: although derived from ‘Finnegan’s Wake’, it also urges the Irish (Finnegans) to rise from their historical stupor.



Much of the Wake concerns the history of this central figure and his family in various incarnations: Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker and his wife Anna Livia Plurabelle are both recognisable within the text by their initials HCE and ALP. Amongst other roles, HCE is Tim Finnegan, the King of Ireland, a pope, an inn-keeper, he is even a giant buried in the grounds of Dublin’s Phoenix Park, whereas ALP also personifies the river Liffey flowing through the centre of Dublin. Other characters include their two sons Shem and Shaun; their daughter Izzy; a group of four old men (who are also the four books of the Gospel and the four provinces of Ireland); twenty-nine young girls and twelve men who are the customers in HCE’s pub and the twelve apostles at the same time. 



Making sense of Joyce’s intentions for Finnegans Wake is complicated by his complex punning style in which allusions to different languages, works of literature, places and historical events overlap in portmanteau words. In the opening sentence of the book, for example, an allusion to ‘Eve and Adam’s’ combines reference to the biblical story of Original sin, a Franciscan Church known as Adam and Eve’s on Merchant’s Quay in Dublin, located on the site of a public house with the same name and (by reversing the names) the relative flow of the nearby Liffey. 



Some critics have suggested its style represents the receptivity of consciousness to multiple meanings whilst dreaming, as if Finnegans Wake were the contents of HCE’s mind as he sleeps or lies unconscious. Samuel Beckett argued Joyce was rescuing language and literature from cliché: ‘Here words are not the polite contortions of 20th century printer’s ink,’ he wrote. ‘They are alive. They elbow their way on to the page, and glow and blaze and fade and disappear’ (Beckett 1929: 15).



Although Work-in-Progress mystified most early readers, Joyce’s break with conventional narrative forms appealed to theorists of textuality and language, such as Roland Barthes, Hélène Cixous, Jacques Derrida and Jacques Lacan. Much recent critical work, however, has focussed upon the Wake’s genesis, tracing the evolution of Joyce’s style through various drafts and attempting to unpick overlapping allusions by uncovering the source materials in his notes. Finnegans Wake remains one of the most challenging literary works ever written.

Further reading:



(Beckett and al.)



(Bishop)



(Derrida)



(Fordham)



(McHugh and Joyce)



(Crispi and Slote)