
Fluxus

Kristen Alfaro

Fluxus

Fluxus is a laboratory for the creation, dissemination, and exhibition of
social and experimental artwork. Through an international network of
artists, designers, filmmakers, and composers, Fluxus promotes collective
artistic labour and an interactive experience with art. Drawing on the
ideas of the Soviet Unions Novy Lef group of 1929, Fluxus objectives
concern the social over the aesthetic and highlight the dissemination and
interactive potential of the art object. Central to Fluxus art (Flux Art)
is the relationship between artwork and participant, which is often
established through the form of jokes, gags, games or events. In 1963,
George Maciunas, a founding member of Fluxus, published a manifesto to
describe Fluxus objectives:

       Purge the world of bourgeois sickness, intellectual, professional &
       commercialized culture, PURGE the world of dead art, imitation,
       artificial art, abstract art, illusionistic art, mathematical art, 
       PROMOTE A REVOLUTIONARY FLOOD AND TIDE IN ART.
       Promote living art, anti-art, promote NON ART REALITY to begrasped
       by all peoples, not only critics, dilettantes and professionals.
       FUSE the cadres of cultural, social & political revolutionaries into
       united front & action.[1]

Rooted in the pedagogical experiments of Black Mountain College and John
Cages seminar at the New School for Social Research, Fluxus philosophy
countered a formalist approach to art by requiring the participant to
interact with the artwork. Flux Art remains incomplete without a
participants engagement. Interactivity, Forti argues, gives the object
value.[2] Because of this, Craig J. Saper and Simone Forti argue that
Fluxus work is intrinsically social and pedagogical. Flux Art would often
include instructions for the user, or in the case of Fluxus Post Kits, the
person delivering the art object. These activities, Saper argues, structure
the Fluxus Laboratory, a term that incorporates the collaborative labour
and experimentation between artists, artwork, and participants.[3] Maciunas
promoted these ideas throughout New York in the early sixties. Initially
rejected, he chose to expand the concept to Europe, where his proposals
garnered an early following. When Maciunas returned to New York in
September 1963, international artists such as Yoko Ono, Nam June Paik, John
Cage, and Robert Watts began to incorporate Fluxus philosophy into
performance art, mail art, film, sound compositions, and art magazines.


Flux Art
Early examples of Fluxus work include the Fluxconcert, which consisted of
events and performances. Maciunas also created Fluxhouses, a set of
cooperatives where artists could live, work, and exhibit. In an early
exhibit, Maciunas opened a temporary FluxClinic that mocked and criticized
the institutionalization of humans in society. Artists would measure the
dimensions of a visitors body and record the measurements in a
Fluxpassport.[4] In the Fluxhouse 80 Wooster Street, Maciunas hosted Flux
feasts, which included a New Years Eve Flux Fest consisting of Flux Eggs
(emptied egg shells filled with items such as plaster, white gelatin, or
dead bugs), Salad Soup by Yoshi Wada, and Shooting Candies with Gun into
Peoples Mouths by Robert Watts.[5] Additionally, Fluxus artists created
Post Kits, which mimicked the structure of the postal system and
incorporated the participation of the mailman.[6]

Fluxus Film Works (Fluxfilms)
Another significant component of Flux Art is the moving image. In the early
Fluxus laboratory, artists utilized protocinematic methods of filmmaking
and focused on simple movements. For example, Dick Higgins Fluxfilm No. 2,
1966, featured a mouth chewing and Yoko Onos Fluxfilm No. 4, 1967,
centered on the movement of a pair of buttocks. The movements were often
looped on short film reels, a process antithetical to Hollywood films.
Fluxfilms lacked the conventional narrative progression found in popular
cinema and utilized humor to produce an effect in the audience, referencing
Marcel Duchamps use of the corrosive joke.[7]

Fluxhouses
As Fluxus continued to expand, Maciunas created the cooperative
Fluxhouses, utopic communities composed of neighbouring buildings in
which artists could work, live, exhibit, and perform in a single space. The
Fluxhouse promoted collective artistic production and residency rooted in
socialist ideology. Over a period of ten years, Maciunas devoted his time
to developing the Fluxus residential community in SoHo. When Maciunas began
advertising the new cooperative, the lofts were located in the M1-5 zoning
district of SoHo, designated for warehouse, manufacturing, or commercial
purposes, which made tenancy illegal. In 1971, New York Mayor Robert Wagner
permitted artists to live in two lofts per factory, on the condition that
sanitation and cooking regulations were met and a six-inch A.I.R. (Artist
in Residence) sign was placed on the faade of the building in compliance
with fire codes. Many artists withdrew from Fluxhouses when they discovered
the zoning obstacles. Nonetheless, Maciunas worked around real estate
syndication laws and filed Fluxhouses as agricultural cooperatives, after
which the city issued a warrant for his arrest.[8] During this time,
artists created the SoHo Artists Association and the Artist Tenants
Association to lobby for the residential rights of artists in SoHo.

Flux Art, Non-Art
Rejecting the notion of Fluxus as an art movement, artists emphasized that
Fluxus is a particular way of living and doing that filtered into the
creation of art, music, film, and residential communities. In artist Dick
Higginss words, (Fluxus is) a way of doing things, a tradition, a way of
life and death.[9]

References and Further Reading

Bernstein Roslyn and Shael Shapiro, Eds. Illegal Living: 80 Wooster Street
and the
Evolution of SoHo. Vilnius, Lithuania: Jono Meko Fondas, 2010. Provides
detailed information about the development of Fluxhouse 80 Wooster Street
in SoHo, as well as accounts of Fluxus events, concerts, and exhibits.

Friedman, Ken Ed. The Fluxus Reader, West Sussex: Academy Editions, 1998.
Ken Friedmans The Fluxus Reader compiles contemporary debates regarding
Fluxus history and historiography. A companion to the archival research in
Bernstein and Shapiros Illegal Living, The Fluxus Reader provides detailed
analysis of the ideas behind Fluxus work and activity.

Higgins, Dick. Horizons: The Poetics and Theory of the Intermedia.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press, 1983. In order to describe Fluxus
work, artist Dick Higgins used the term intermedia. In this book, Higgins
explains the concept behind his definition of Intermedia and its
relationship to Fluxus.

Higgins, Hannah. Fluxus Experience. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2002. Centering on the Fluxus Event and the Fluxkit, Higgins focuses
on the principle of experience and its function within Fluxus.

Saper, Craig J. Networked Art. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2001. Provides detailed analysis of Fluxus as a networked community and
the ways in which Fluxus mail art challenged institutional bureaucracies.


Paratextual Material

1. game Link to photographs of George Brechts Games and Puzzles (Bull,
Swim and Inclines Plane Puzzles), Fluxkit, 1965, Fluxus Edition announced
1964-65.
Museum of Modern Art
http://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2011/fluxus_editions/works/game
s-puzzles-ball-swim-and-inclined-plane-puzzles-from-fluxkit/

2. manifesto Link to scan of George Maciunas Fluxus manifesto, 1963.
Museum of Modern Art
http://www.moma.org/explore/inside_out/inside_out/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/Image_2.sm_.jpg

3. Fluxconcert Link to Ubuweb: Sound, Fluxus Anthology 30th Anniversary.
Recordings of performances, interviews.
Ubuweb
http://www.ubu.com/sound/fluxus_box.html

4. Fluxfilms Link to Ubuweb Fluxfilm Anthology (1962-70)
Ubuweb
http://www.ubu.com/film/fluxfilm.html

5. Fluxfilm No. 2, 1966 Link to Dick Higgins Fluxfilm No. 2
Ubuweb
http://www.ubu.com/film/fluxfilm02_higgins.html

6. Fluxfilm No. 4, 1967 Link to Yoko Onos Fluxfilm No. 4
Ubuweb
http://www.ubu.com/film/fluxfilm15a_ono.html



-----------------------
[1] George Maciunas, Fluxus Manifesto, 1963, Theories and Documents of
Contemporary Art: A Sourcebook of Artists Writings. Ed. Kristine Stiles
and Peter Selz. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 727.
[2] Simone Fortin. Handbook in Motion. (Halifax: Nova Scotia College of Art
and Design, 1974).
[3] Craig J. Saper. Fluxus as a Laboratory, The Fluxus Reader. Ed. Ken
Friedman. (West Sussex: Academy Editions, 1998).
[4] Hannah Higgins, Fluxus Fortuna, The Fluxus Reader, Ed. Ken Friedman,
(West Sussex: Academy Editions, 1998), 56.
[5] For detailed descriptions of Fluxus events at 80 Wooster Street, see
Roslyn Bernstein and Shael Shapiros Illegal Living: 80 Wooster Street and
the Evolution of SoHo, (Vilnius, Lithuania: Jono Meko Fondas, 2010), 101.
[6] Mailmen were instructed to choose between two mailing addresses and
thus given the agency to direct the destination of the kit. Craig J. Saper,
Fluxus: Instructions for an Intimate Bureaucracy Networked Art
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2001), 127.
[7] Craig J. Saper, The Fluxus Reader, 155
[8] Roslyn Bernstein and Shael Shapiro, Illegal Living: 80 Wooster Street
and the Evolution of SoHo, (Vilnius, Lithuania: Jono Meko Fondas, 2010).
[9] Ken Friedman, Introduction: A Transformative Vision of Fluxus, The
Fluxus Reader, viii.

