

[Enter an abstract for your article]

Nabil Anani was born in Latrun, Palestine in 1943. He graduated in Fine Arts from Alexandra University, Egypt in 1969, after which he became a teacher trainer at the UN training college in Ramallah while remaining a full-time practitioner in his studio there. Anani was awarded the first Palestinian National Prize for Visual Art in 1997 by the late President Yasser Arafat and became the head of the League of Palestinian Artists in 1998. In 2006 he was awarded The King Abdullah of Jordan Award in Fine Arts for the Middle East. He participated in numerous exhibitions of Palestinian Art around the world and was a founding member of Al Wasiti Art Centre in Jerusalem and The International Academy of Art, Palestine in Ramallah. He was commissioned to undertake several public works in Palestine including sculptures and murals. Anani is known for his paintings of the Palestinian landscape, in which he focuses on life in the village. In the 1980s, he and other Palestinian artists perceived and depicted the Palestinian countryside as place untouched by the changes of occupation. Along with artists Sliman Mansour, he was one of the key artists in the Occupied Territories to create images of longing and nostalgia for the homeland, in his distinctive style of accumulative painted space in decorative detail and heavy outlines. In the late 1990s he moved away from works in oil and watercolors to mixed media, using natural materials such as henna dyes, leather and other materials he stumbled on as part of the New Vision art group. He also undertook sculptural works made out of wood and papier-mâché. Even as his career progresses, Anani’s primary subjects continue to be the landscape, the village, and Palestinian traditions.



Further reading:



Boullata, Kamal (2009) Palestinian Art: From 1850 to the Present, Saqi Books, London.

KSCC (2001) Nabil Anani Catalogue for Solo Exhibition “Chairs.”

Anani, N. & Bader, I. (1984) “Palestinian Plastic Arts in the Occupied Territories”, Arabic, Gallery 79, Jerusalem.

Kananeh, S., Anani, N., and others (1984) “Palestinian Popular Costumes”,  Arabic, Inash Al-Osrah Association, EL-Biereh

Anani, N. & Mansour, S. (1986) “The Guide to Palestinian Embroidery”, Arabic, Inash Al-Osrah Association, EL-Biereh.