
FRENCH NEW WAVE


Overview

The French New Wave is a term associated with a group of  French  filmmakers
and the films they directed from the late 1950s until the mid-60s. Its  most
representative  directors  were  championed  by  the  influential   magazine
Cahiers du Cinma, and include Franois Truffaut,  Claude  Chabrol,  Jacques
Rivette, Jean-Luc Godard, and Eric Rohmer. Since  most  of  these  directors
were also prolific film critics, the  New  Wave  is  also  notable  for  the
important body of theoretical work  it  produced,  particularly  the  auteur
theory introduced by Andr Bazin, one of the Cahiers founders. A  secondary
group of directors,  the  so-called  Rive  Gauche  (Left  Bank)  Group,  was
associated largely with Cahiers arch rival, Positif, and had a  contentious
relationship with the core  New  Wave  group,  although  they  were  equally
influential on the French cinema of the time and were  often  designated  as
New Wave themselves. Important  Left  Bank  directors  were  Alain  Resnais,
Agns Varda and Chris Marker.

It is important to recognize that French  New  Wave  does  not  designate  a
specific film school or even an  organized  movement  (hence  the  sometimes
disputed affiliations of some directors); rather, it is a label bestowed  by
the press and the critics to identify a new  mode  of  radically  innovative
cinema production and direction that sought to  separate  itself  (sometimes
forcefully) from the older studio-bound practices of  the  so-called  cinma
de qualit (quality cinema), characterized by  an  over-reliance  on  period
dramas  and  literary  adaptations.  In  contrast,  New   Wave   films   are
experimental, playful and innovative, largely produced  outside  the  studio
system and for markedly lower budgets, favoring exterior shots  and  natural
sound. Notable techniques include  long  takes  and  discontinuous  editing.
Thematically, they tend to focus on young characters whose exuberance  hides
existential dilemmas associated with  modern  life.   Narratives  frequently
employ a mix of subjective and objective perspectives  and  sometimes  break
the fourth wall. The New Wave is also noted for its love of Hollywood  genre
films (like those of Alfred Hitchcock, Orson Welles  and  Nicholas  Ray),  a
trait that is absent from most of the work of the Left Bank directors.

Naming the New Wave: Critical Reception

The New Wave label has been somewhat controversial from the very  beginning.
Popularized by the weekly LExpress in the mid-50s as  a  way  to  refer  to
certain  innovative  and  youthful  tendencies  in   French   culture,   the
designation did not sit  well  with  the  very  directors  to  whom  it  was
attached.  They  resented  what  they  perceived  as  pigeonholing.   Claude
Chabrol,  whose  Le  Beau  Serge  [Beautiful  Serge,  1958]   is   generally
considered the first French New Wave film,  goes  so  far  as  to  deny  the
existence of a New Wave in the first place: In 1958 and  1959,  myself  and
the whole Cahiers team, once we started making films, were promoted  like  a
brand of soap. (qtd in Vincendeau 10).

Regardless of labels, the directors of the New Wave were  definitely  moving
in uncharted  if not  entirely  new    territory.  Neupert  (2002,  2007),
alongside Nowell-Smith  (2007),  contends  that,  while  its  products  were
certainly original,  the  French  New  Wave  itself  was  simply  the  local
manifestation of broader innovative  trends  emerging  in  several  European
post-war cinemas  most notably, Italian neorealism, widely acknowledged  as
an  influence  on  the  New  Waves  preference  for  location   shots   and
observational realism. Neupert in particular is very careful  to  trace  the
origins of the New Wave through several larger cultural shifts happening  in
French culture. The experiments of nouveau roman novelists like Alain Robbe-
Grillet and Marguerite Duras, and nouveau thatre dramatists  like  Beckett,
Ionesco, and Adamov,  are  reflected  in  the  impersonal,  often  schematic
narrative, occasional absurdism and flat characters of Godards    Bout  de
souffle [Breathless, 1960] and Bande  Part [Band  of  Outsiders,  1964]  or
Truffauts Tirez sur le pianiste [Shoot  the  Piano  Player,  1960].  Robbe-
Grillet and Duras would later  collaborate  with  Alain  Resnais  on  Lane
dernire  Marienbad [Last Year at Marienbad, 1961] and Hiroshima mon  amour
(1959) respectively. Claude Lvi-Strauss and Roland Barthes championing  of
structuralism is especially relevant, Neupert observes, as its  analysis  of
culture as a complex system of signs aligns almost perfectly  with  the  New
Waves tendency to draw attention to the mechanisms of cinema, exposing  its
articulations and  artificial  nature  via  sudden  shifts  in  perspective,
freeze frames, or breaking the  fourth  wall.  In  addition,  Barthes  1957
collection of essays Mythologies  approached  elements  of  popular  culture
like wrestling, film, or advertising with the  theoretical  instruments  and
scholarly application usually reserved for high culture    a  method  which
Cahiers du cinma was simultaneously applying to Hollywood genre fare.

The New Waves reputation as an organized movement kept growing  long  after
the trend itself had ceased. By 1976 James Monacos The New Wave:  Truffaut,
Godard,  Chabrol,  Rohmer,  Rivette  was  praising  the  New  Wave  for  the
intellectual nature of its films.  Other  notable  studies,  like  those  by
Antoine de Baecque (1998) and  Serge  Daney  (1998),  similarly  stress  the
complexity and importance of the  New  Wave  corpus  though,  as  Vincendeau
(2009) notes, the hierarchies established by the  Cahiers  auteur  politics
[politique des auteurs] remain largely unchallenged.

That is not to say that the praise has been universal or  unconditional.  As
early as the 1950s, the critics associated with Positif (Raymond  Borde  and
Grard Gozlan among others) were challenging  Cahiers  (and  by  extension,
the New Wave directors) quasi-fetishization  of  the  auteur,  the  muddled
terminology of their theoretical work, and the films perceived  shallowness
and lack of political engagement. More recently there have been attempts  to
rethink the New Wave canon (see Flitterman-Lewis 1990)  along  gender  lines
by focusing on Agns Varda, a formative yet oddly marginalized figure.

Foundations

The seeds of New Wave cinema were planted soon after World  War  II  in  the
animated conversations taking place in the cin-clubs that were  popping  up
all over France. Most notable  were  Objectif  49  (organized  by  Alexandre
Astruc, Andr Bazin, Jean Cocteau and  Robert  Bresson)  and  Eric  Rohmers
Cinclub du Quartier Latin. The  eclectic,  sprawling  collection  of  Henri
Langlois Cinmathque Franaise helped cement the  cinephilia  of  the  New
Wave generation of directors and critics.

The theoretical foundations  of  the  French  New  Wave  grew  out  of  this
sophisticated film culture and  can  be  located  in  three  seminal  essays
published between 1948 and 1958. In The Birth  of  a  New  Avant-Garde:  La
Camra-Stylo (1948) Alexandre Astruc refuses  the  modernist  avant-gardes
focus on visuality as the sole property of film and seeks to broaden  cinema
into  a  dynamic  language  which  could  put  it  on  equal  footing   with
literature.  Franois  Truffauts  rebellious,  even  arrogant  A   Certain
Tendency in French Cinema (1954)  rails  against  the  so  called  quality
cinema of the French studios of the 40s and 50s. The writers of such  films
(mostly adaptations of literary works) started from the premise that  cinema
is inferior to literature and therefore simplified narrative  and  character
development  into  mediocre,  boring  products.  The  alternative  to   this
scriptwriters cinema, Truffaut argues is the auteur  cinema  of  Henri-
Georges Clouzot and Robert  Bresson,  where  the  director  is  involved  in
almost all the creative  decisions,  beginning  with  the  script.  Finally,
Bazins seminal The Evolution of  Film  Language  (1958)  establishes  the
foundations of a new cinematic  canon,  signaling  the  shift  from  montage
understood as the basis of cinematic expression towards  a  visual  language
based in long takes that afford the viewers gaze the  luxury  of  wandering
about a scene and in which editing takes on a  purely  negative  quality  of
eliminating what is superfluous (69). Frequently cited  names  are  Robert
Murnau, William Wyler, Jean Renoir, Roberto Rosellini and, of course,  Orson
Welles, whose proto-auteur film Citizen Kane  is  arguably  the  French  New
Waves fetish film.

So strong was this drive to theory  that  the  French  New  Wave  holds  the
peculiar distinction of having a significant number  of  its  major  figures
(like Truffaut and Rohmer) start off as film critics rather than  directors.
Some scholars, most notably Roy Armes (1985) even go as far as  to  consider
these critic-directors as the only pure members of the New  Wave.  Astruc,
Truffaut and Bazins  essays  reflect  an  intense  preoccupation  with  the
legitimization of film  as  a  complex  artistic  language,  which  (despite
Astrucs protestations to the  contrary)  places  the  French  New  Wave  in
direct  continuation  of  similar  concerns  voiced   by   the   avant-garde
filmmakers of the 20s and 30s. The auteur  theory  promoted  by  Cahiers  du
cinma thus emerges as a direct  reaction  against  the  perceived  artistic
indifference and anonymity inherent in the conception of film  as  a  purely
industrial practice. The  ideal  director  is  therefore  also  a  writer  
someone who exerts full control over every frame of the film and guides  the
gaze of the spectator through long  takes  and  complex  mise-en-scene.  The
auteur theory reflects the complex nature of the New Waves  filmic  corpus,
favoring  simultaneously  an  unobtrusive  form  of  observational   realism
bordering  on  the  metaphysical,  and  the  playful   revelation   of   the
artificiality of the medium  the former evidenced by Bazin  and  Truffauts
admiration for Bresson and Rossellini, and the latter  manifest  in  Godard,
Chabrol and Truffauts love of Hollywood genre  fare  like  gangster  movies
and melodramas.

The Cahiers near-deification of the director-auteur put it  in  direct  and
often virulent conflict with rival magazine Positif,  whose  editorial  team
favored  a  more  political  and  experimental  cinema  and  found   Bazins
metaphysical musings at least imprecisely worded  and  at  worst  unbearably
elitist. Tangentially associated with the magazine were the so-called  Left
Bank directors like Alain Resnais, Agns  Varda  and  the  enigmatic  Chris
Marker (born Christian Franois Bouche-Villeneuve). Despite Positifs  overt
rejection of the New  Wave  auteurs,  the  Left  Bank  directors  frequently
crossed over to their Right Bank colleagues,  incorporating  Vardas  1962
Clo de 5  7 [Clo from 5 to 7] and Resnais Last Year  at  Marienbad  into
the New Wave canon. Nonetheless,  the  Left  Bank  films  are  more  overtly
experimental  Chris Markers 1962 short La Jete [The Jetty], for  example,
consists entirely of still images.. The  films  are  less  narrative,  often
more political and more collaborative, with scripts  authored  by  novelists
like Marguerite Duras and Alain Robbe-Grillet.

Legacy

The New Wave began to waning  around  1964-1965  and  ebbed  away  with  the
turbulent events of 1968, which rendered its more introspective,  apolitical
aspects  increasingly  obsolete.  Its  legacy   nonetheless   continued   to
solidify. Many of its most prominent  directors,  like  Godard,  Rohmer  and
Rivette (as well as Left Bank directors  like  Varda,  Resnais  and  Marker)
would  go  on  to  lengthy,  fascinating  careers,  marked  by  a   constant
willingness to experiment. The New Waves most lasting legacy, however,  has
been its construction of a  new  cinematic  language.  Many  of  its  formal
innovations, such as long takes, hand-held  shots,  jump  cuts,  and  freeze
frames have made their way into the work of the New Hollywood  directors  of
the 60s and 70s, most notably Martin  Scorsese,  Francis  Ford  Coppola  and
Robert Altman.  The  New  Waves  iconoclasm,  drive  towards  realism,  and
flexible production methods pointed the way for  the  creative  upheaval  of
the Czech New Wave of the  late  60s  and  provided  a  template  for  other
emerging national cinemas, from Poland to Romania to  Iran.  More  recently,
the postmodern pastiche of Quentin Tarantino owes an important debt  to  the
New Wave, particularly to its cinephile  culture  and  to  Godards  playful
Breathless and Band of Outsiders (Tarantinos  production  company  is  even
named Bande  Part). Finally, contemporary directors like Wes  Anderson  and
Noah Baumbach continue to create in the formal  tradition  of  Truffaut  and
Rohmer.

Selected Filmography:

1. Precursors:

Journal dun cur de campagne (Diary of a Country Priest; 1951, dir.  Robert
Bresson)
Le Silence de la mer  (The  Silence  of  the  Sea;  1949,  dir.  Jean-Pierre
Melville)
Bob le flambeur (Bob the Gambler; 1956, dir. Jean-Pierre Meville)
La Pointe Courte (1955; dir. Agns Varda)

2. Representative works

Franois Truffaut
Les 400 coups (The 400 Blows; 1959)
Tirez sur le pianiste (Shoot the Piano Player; 1960)
Jules et Jim (Jules and Jim; 1962)

Jean-Luc Godard
 Bout de souffle (Breathless; 1960)
Bande  part (Band of Outsiders; 1964)
La Chinoise (1967)
Week-End (1967)

Jacques Rivette
Paris nous appartient (Paris Belongs to Us; 1961)

Claude Chabrol
Le Beau Serge (Handsome Serge; 1958)
Les Cousins (The Cousins; 1959)
Landru (1963)

Eric Rohmer
Le Signe du Lo (The Sign of the Lion; 1959)
La Collectionneuse (The Collector; 1967)

3. Left Bank directors

Agns Varda
Clo de 5  7 (Cleo from 5 to 7; 1962)
Le Bonheur (Happiness; 1965)

Alain Resnais
Hiroshima mon amour (1959)
LAnne dernire  Marienbad (Last Year at Marienbad;1961)

Chris Marker
La Jete (The Jetty; 1962)
Le Joli mai (The Beautiful May; 1963; recut in 2006)

4. Legacy

Sedmikrsky (Daisies; 1966, dir. Vra Chytilov)
Ho, m panenko (The Firemens Ball; 1967, dir. Milo Forman)
The Long Goodbye (1973; dir. Robert Altman)
Mean Streets (1973; dir. Martin Scorsese)
Duminic la ora ase (Sunday at 6 PM; 1966, dir. Lucian Pintilie)
Mosfer (The Traveler; 1974, dir. Abbas Kiarostami)
Reservoir Dogs (1992; dir. Quentin Tarantino)
Rushmore (1998; dir. Wes Anderson)
Frances Ha (2013; dir. Noah Baumbach)

Bibliography and further reading:

Armes, Roy (1985) French Cinema. New York: Oxford University Press.
Daney, Serge (1998) Survivre  la Nouvelle Vague. In  Cahiers  du  cinma,
special issue:  La Nouvelle Vague en question. December 1998.
De Baeque, Antoine  (1998)  La  Nouvelle  Vague:  Portrait  dune  jeunesse.
Paris: Flammarion.
Flitterman-Lewis, Sandy (1990)  To  Desire  Differently:  Feminism  and  the
French Cinema. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Marie, Michel (2002) The French New Wave: An Artistic School. Translated  by
Richard Neupert. Malden: Blackwell.
Monaco, James (1976)  The  New  Wave:  Truffaut,  Godard,  Chabrol,  Rohmer,
Rivette. New York: New York University Press.
Neupert, Richard (2007) A History of the  French  New  Wave  Cinema.  Second
edition. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press.
Nowell-Smith, Geoffrey (2007) Making Waves: New Cinemas of  the  1960s.  New
York: Continuum
Dorota Ostrowska (2008) Reading the French New Wave:  Critics,  Writers  and
Art Cinema in France. London: Wallflower Press
Vincendeau, Ginette and Peter Graham (2009) The French  New  Wave:  Critical
Landmarks. London: BFI


Selected Filmography:

2. Precursors:

Journal dun cur de campagne (Diary of a Country Priest; 1951, dir.  Robert
Bresson)
Le Silence de la mer  (The  Silence  of  the  Sea;  1949,  dir.  Jean-Pierre
Melville)
Bob le flambeur (Bob the Gambler; 1956, dir. Jean-Pierre Meville)
La Pointe Courte (1955; dir. Agns Varda)

3. Representative works

Franois Truffaut
Les 400 coups (The 400 Blows; 1959)
Tirez sur le pianiste (Shoot the Piano Player; 1960)
Jules et Jim (Jules and Jim; 1962)

Jean-Luc Godard
 Bout de souffle (Breathless; 1960)
Bande  part (Band of Outsiders; 1964)
La Chinoise (1967)
Week-End (1967)

Jacques Rivette
Paris nous appartient (Paris Belongs to Us; 1961)

Claude Chabrol
Le Beau Serge (Handsome Serge; 1958)
Les Cousins (The Cousins; 1959)
Landru (1963)

Eric Rohmer
Le Signe du Lo (The Sign of the Lion; 1959)
La Collectionneuse (The Collector; 1967)

4. Left Bank directors

Agns Varda
Clo de 5  7 (Cleo from 5 to 7; 1962)
Le Bonheur (Happiness; 1965)

Alain Resnais
Hiroshima mon amour (1959)
LAnne dernire  Marienbad (Last Year at Marienbad;1961)

Chris Marker
La Jete (The Jetty; 1962)
Le Joli mai (The Beautiful May; 1963; recut in 2006)

5. Legacy

Sedmikrsky (Daisies; 1966, dir. Vra Chytilov)
Ho, m panenko (The Firemens Ball; 1967, dir. Milo Forman)
The Long Goodbye (1973; dir. Robert Altman)
Mean Streets (1973; dir. Martin Scorsese)
Duminic la ora ase (Sunday at 6 PM; 1966, dir. Lucian Pintilie)
Mosfer (The Traveler; 1974, dir. Abbas Kiarostami)
Reservoir Dogs (1992; dir. Quentin Tarantino)
Rushmore (1998; dir. Wes Anderson)
Frances Ha (2013; dir. Noah Baumbach)

Contributor: Maria Ioni, Ryerson University

