

Erich Fromm was a German psychoanalyst, sociologist, and philosopher. Fromm graduated from the University of Frankfurt in 1919, before writing his dissertation under the supervision of the economic geographer and sociologist Alfred Weber in Heidelberg in 1922. Following his Ph.D., and influenced by Freud and his future wife Frieda Reichmann, Fromm entered a period of sustained psychoanalytic training: in 1927 he published his first works of Freudian psychoanalysis and three years later joined the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt, taking charge of the Institute’s programs in social psychology and psychoanalysis.

Erich Fromm was a German psychoanalyst, sociologist, and philosopher. Fromm graduated from the University of Frankfurt in 1919, before writing his dissertation under the supervision of the economic geographer and sociologist Alfred Weber in Heidelberg in 1922. Following his Ph.D., and influenced by Freud and his future wife Frieda Reichmann, Fromm entered a period of sustained psychoanalytic training: in 1927 he published his first works of Freudian psychoanalysis and three years later joined the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt, taking charge of the Institute’s programs in social psychology and psychoanalysis. In 1934, Fromm fled Germany for New York, working again at the Institute for Social Research, now exiled at Columbia University. Following ill-health and a series of quarrels with Adorno and Marcuse, Fromm left the Institute in 1939; in 1941, the same year as his influential Escape from Freedom was published, he began teaching at the New School for Social Research. In 1950 Fromm left the United States for Mexico, where he published 1955’s The Sane Society, followed by his international bestseller The Art of Loving a year later. Although Fromm’s synthesis of Freudian psychoanalysis and Marxian social critique bears a passing resemblance to the work of Herbert Marcuse, Fromm’s stance toward Freud and Marx was considerably more critical.



Further reading:

Bibliography online at: www.erich-fromm.de/images/stories/pdf/22.pdf [I tried opening the link but it appears to be inaccessible]