
Fruto Vivas
(born January 21, 1928, La Grita, Venezuela with  the  name  Jos  Fructuoso
Vivas)

Juan Jose Perez Rancel, Historia y Crtica de la Arquitectura, Facultad de
Arquitectura y Urbanismo, Universidad Central de Venezuela
co-author: Viviana d'Auria, Department of architecture,urbanism and
planning, KU Leuven


Successful architect born in the Venezuelan Andes, Fruto Vivas receives his
training in Caracas during the citys mid-20th century booming
modernisation. His approach to popular culture was at the basis of his
proposals for a national architecture, which is based on Venezuelan
Hispanic typologies, traditional techniques and regional materials. Such
references earn his architecture the label of  "populist" by critics.

Since the 1960s, Vivas applies these proposals to an  architecture  inspired
by natures functional logic, from which two main theses arise: on  the  one
hand, "structural types" or "boundary structures" and  on  the  other  hand,
the idea of living  trees.  While  the  former  analyses  the  subject  of
structural  elements  minimum  dimensions  and  weights  to  enable   self-
construction for an "architecture of the  masses",  the  latter  illustrates
how houses can do without many devices for their conditioning and  they  can
even be self-generative to guarantee the survival of their users.

These theses have been articulated by means of the extensive development  of
housing  prototypes  linked  to   political   gestures   of   national   and
international solidarity in many Venezuelan and Latin American slums,  post-
disaster work (earthquake in Managua, 1980, floods in Ecuador or in  Bocon,
Venezuelan Andes), post-conflict construction (reconstruction of  Sandinista
Nicaragua) or support to the architectural experimentation in  Cuba  between
1966 and 1968 (Director of the Department of Constructive Techniques  inside
the Ministry of Construction, Havana).

The emphasis that Vivas  has  placed  on  housing  throughout  Venezuela  is
complemented by three spectacular non-residential projects:  the  paraboloid
shell in Club Tchira (1954-1955), a structure intended to  demonstrate  the
supremacy of architectural intuition over  rational  calculation,  with  the
help of Spanish engineer, Eduardo Torroja; the Caron Hotel (1963-1964,  not
built), a modular structure  of  triangular  frames,  facing  the  falls  of
Venezuelan Guayana; and "la Flor de Venezuela" (the Venezuelan flower),  the
Venezuelan Pavilion built with Frei Otto, among others, for  the  Expo  2000
in Hanover, an architectural machinery with closings and roofs  adapting  to
climate and lighting changes through movable "petals" that  imitate  orchids
(Venezuela's national flower) on a platform similar to "tepuyes",  table-top
mountains found in the Amazonian Venezuelan rainforest.

Fruto Vivas graduated as an architect (1955) at the  Central  University  of
Venezuela, and that same year he collaborated with Oscar Niemeyer, when  the
Brazilian architect designed a Museum of Modern Art for Caracas.  From  that
moment on, his architectural work is based on technological  experimentation
through prototypes that seek to integrate the concept of  space  and  nature
in a tropical environment, prefabrication and  self-construction,  technical
reproducibility  and  self-management,  architecture  for  the  masses   and
national architecture, technological independence and "liberation".

Since 1956, he has been  Professor  in  the  faculties  of  Architecture  of
numerous universities, such as Universidad Central de  Venezuela  (Caracas),
Universidad de Los Andes  (Mrida),  Lisandro  Alvarado  (Barquisimeto)  and
other Latin American universities. In 1990, he was named director of the  UN
project for the Development of Productive Communities. In 1991, he  obtained
the National Prize for Architecture; in 2000, the  National  Habitat  Award,
given by the National Housing Council, and in 2012, he received an  honorary
doctorate from the Central University of Venezuela.

Further readings:

Diccionario de las Artes Visuales en Venezuela, Monte vila/Galera de Arte
Nacional, Caracas, 1984.

Vivas, Fruto, Reflexiones para un mundo mejor, Ed. del autor/Grficas
Armitano, Caracas, 1983.

http://www.frutovivas.net
