
Fry, Roger Eliot (1866-1934)

Roger Fry was an art critic, painter, lecturer, and curator whose name is
often associated with the Bloomsbury Group. Born in London to a prominent
Quaker family, Fry was educated at Kings College, Cambridge, where he
became one of the famed Cambridge Apostles. He studied natural sciences,
earning first-class honours, though his true love was art. He studied
painting under the tutelage of Francis Bate in London in 1889 and at the
Acadmie Julian in Paris in 1892. Though he considered himself a painter
first and foremost, Fry was most respected as a critic of art. He is best
remembered as a proponent of modern French painting, having coined the term
post-Impressionism in 1910 as he was organising the exhibition Manet and
the Post-Impressionists at the Grafton Galleries in London. Two years
later, Fry curated The Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition with Clive Bell
and Boris von Anrep.  In 1913, Fry opened a decorative arts firm called the
Omega Workshops in the Bloomsbury section of London. Duncan Grant (1885-
1978) and Vanessa Bell (1879-1961) were also members of the Omega, which
shut down in 1919 due to financial struggles and personal tensions. Both as
an art critic and a painter Fry was a formalist. He promulgated the belief
that subject matter in a work of art is secondary to the formal properties
of a work  line, mass, color, and spatial relationships  because formal
qualities, he believed, hold universal appeal and are neither culture- nor
time-specific. These views are made apparent in Frys copious writings.

Fry established his reputation in the late 1890s and early 1900s by writing
about the art of the Italian Renaissance. His first monograph, published in
1899, was about Giovanni Bellini. Manet and the Post-Impressionists
featured the work of Paul Czanne, Paul Gauguin, and Vincent van Gogh,
among others, and was greeted with great skepticism, both by the public and
by Frys fellow critics, who perceived this unfamiliar art as radical and
subversive.   The second exhibition in 1912 was more of a popular and
critical success since much of the art-viewing public had assimilated an
aesthetic sensibility that a mere two years earlier was alien to them.

Throughout his forty-plus-year career as a critic, Frys essays were
published regularly in Burlington Magazine (which he helped found in 1903),
Athenaeum, and Apollo, among numerous other periodicals. In 1920, Fry
published the first of three anthologies of his essays, Vision and Design.
Transformations: Critical and Speculative Essays on Art followed in 1926.
Last Lectures, posthumously published in 1935, comprises the series of
Slade Lectures that Fry was in the midst of delivering at Cambridge at the
time of his death in 1934. Kenneth Clark, a protg of Frys, famously
wrote in his preface to Last Lectures: In so far as taste can be changed
by one man, it was changed by Roger Fry. No declaration could better
reflect the influence Fry had upon the appreciation of art, both in his own
day and for generations to come.

References and Further Reading:

Fried, Michael, Roger Frys Formalism, The Tanner Lectures on Human
Values (Ann Arbor, 2001).

Green, Christopher, ed., Art Made Modern: Roger Frys Vision of Art
(London, 1999).

Laing, Donald, Roger Fry: An Annotated Bibliography of the Published
Writings (New York, 1979).

Reed, Christopher, ed., A Roger Fry Reader (Chicago, 1996).

Rubin, Adrianne, Roger Frys Difficult and Uncertain Science: The
Interpretation of Aesthetic Perception
     (Bern, 2013).

Shone, Richard, ed., The Art of Bloomsbury: Roger Fry, Vanessa Bell and
Duncan Grant (London, 1999).

Spalding, Frances, Roger Fry: Art and Life (1980/Norwich, 1999).

Woolf, Virginia, Roger Fry: A Biography (1940/San Diego, 1968).



Image:

Roger Fry, Self-Portrait, 1930-34, National Portrait Gallery, London

