

Dizzy Gillespie was an American jazz trumpeter, composer, and bandleader. Over the course of his artistic career Gillespie was based in New York City, where he was first active performing in big bands, eventually leading bands of his own. Along with his musical colleague, alto saxophonist Charlie Parker, Gillespie was one of the progenitors of the modern jazz movement bebop in the 1940s. Considered one of the pioneers of Latin jazz, especially Afro-Cuban jazz, Gillespie traveled extensively, performing with an international roster of musicians. Compositions that reflect this style of jazz include ‘Tin Tin Deo,’ and ‘Manteca’ (1947). Gillespie’s musical orientation to Afro rhythms was evident as early as 1942, when he composed the jazz standard ‘A Night in Tunisia.’ When he dissembled his big band to form a sextet in 1949, Gillespie gave modern jazz tenor saxophonist John Coltrane his start in improvisational focused small band work.

Dizzy Gillespie was an American jazz trumpeter, composer, and bandleader. Over the course of his artistic career Gillespie was based in New York City, where he was first active performing in big bands, eventually leading bands of his own. Along with his musical colleague, alto saxophonist Charlie Parker, Gillespie was one of the progenitors of the modern jazz movement bebop in the 1940s. Considered one of the pioneers of Latin jazz, especially Afro-Cuban jazz, Gillespie traveled extensively, performing with an international roster of musicians. Compositions that reflect this style of jazz include ‘Tin Tin Deo,’ and ‘Manteca’ (1947). Gillespie’s musical orientation to Afro rhythms was evident as early as 1942, when he composed the jazz standard ‘A Night in Tunisia.’ When he dissembled his big band to form a sextet in 1949, Gillespie gave modern jazz tenor saxophonist John Coltrane his start in improvisational focused small band work.



Dizzy Gillespie was born John Birks Gillespie on 21 October 1917 in Cheraw, South Carolina. Gillespie started playing the piano at age four, and throughout his artistic career turned to the piano to make sense of and conceptualise the advanced chord progressions and harmonies that would come to characterise modern jazz movements like the bebop he co-founded. Gillespie performed with alto saxophonist Charlie Parker in the Billy Eckstine band starting in 1944, which was considered the first modern big band of bebop jazz. Gillespie and Parker would experiment with new, advanced bebop improvisations and harmonies after big band performances, most commonly at after hour jam sessions with pianist Thelonious Monk at the club known as Minton’s Playhouse in Harlem.



Having established bebop in full with Parker by 1946, Gillespie turned his attention to the music of Latin America, namely of Cuba, fusing it with modern music from United States (such as jazz), and subsequently creating a new style known as Afro-Cuban jazz. Gillespie was signed to a contract with recording company RCA Victor, where he began recording his Afro-Cuban jazz compositions with a big band, including songs ‘Manteca’ and ‘Tin Tin Deo’ (co-written with his big band’s conga player, Chano Pozo, in 1947). His Orchestra performed and recorded bebop too, including compositions like ‘Anthropology,’ co-written with Parker in the course of their small combo work in 1945, and recorded by the Gillespie Orchestra in 1948. Gillespie would become a cultural ambassador of modern jazz as early as 1956, performing bebop and Afro-Cuban jazz while touring the world with the support of the U.S. State Department, diplomatically promoting these and other modern musics of the Americas. He later formed the United Nations Orchestra, and toured the world again. 



Gillespie performed and recorded with bassist Charles Mingus on a number of occasions, usually in a quintet setting with Charlie Parker on alto saxophone, much of the time performing Gillespie’s compositions. The quartet with Parker and Mingus played notable concerts in the 1950s, and would often perform Gillespie’s compositions ‘Groovin’ High’ and ‘A Night in Tunisia,’ among other bebop focused compositions written in the 1940s. Gillespie was awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1989. He died in Englewood, New Jersey, on 6 January 1993, at age 75.   

Further reading:

 (DeVeaux)



(Gentry)



(Giddins and DeVeaux)



(Gioia)



(Horricks)



(Maggin)



(McRae)



(Shipton)



(Vail)