
Gibbon, Lewis Grassic (James Leslie Mitchell) (1901-1935)

Thumbnail
Lewis Grassic Gibbon, pseudonym for James Leslie Mitchell, was a key writer
of the early 20th-century Scottish Renaissance, most famous for his trilogy
A Scots QuairSunset Song (1932), Cloud Howe (1933), and Grey Granite
(1934). Even though most critical attention has focused on this trilogy,
Mitchell published a wide body of work, ranging from historical fiction to
archaeological adventure to science fiction. His work often reflects a
leftist, anarcho-socialist politics and a diffusionist worldview in which
modern civilization progressively distances humanity from a primitive,
utopian state of being. Mitchell published seventeen books, fifteen between
1931 and 1934, before dying at the age of thirty four.

Entry
Lewis Grassic Gibbon was the penname adopted by James Leslie Mitchell, born
on 13 February 1901 in Auchterless, Aberdeenshire, Scotland. After working
as a journalist in Aberdeen and Glasgow (and being fired for falsifying
expenses to fund his left-leaning politics), Mitchell joined the Army in
1919 and was posted to the Middle East, which furthered his interest in
archaeology and exploration. Mitchell published his first book, Hanno: or
the Future of Exploration, An Essay in Prophecy in 1928, followed two years
later by his first novel, Stained Radiance: A Fictionists Prelude. In the
next five years, Mitchell published in multiple genres under both his name
and his nom de plume. In February 1935, at the age of 34, Mitchell suffered
a perforated ulcer and died of peritonitis.

Three thematic and formal currents run through Mitchells work. First, for
Mitchell, modern culture is an increasingly weakened version of a pre-
civilizational utopia. This theory, called diffusionism, ascribes
modernitys barbarity (especially WWI) to growing distance from an edenic
past. Second, informed by diffusionisms pessimistic vision of modernity,
Mitchells writing blends anarchist and socialist politics suspicious of
gradualist and reformist socialist models like FABIANISM. Lastly, his
experiments with language and narrative form matched the success of HUGH
MACDIARMIDs revitalisation of the Scots language in the 1920s. Mitchell,
however, did not seek to expand Scots vocabulary but foreignised English by
moulding it into the rhythms and cadences of spoken Scots, with Scots words
added where necessary.

Mitchell synthesizes these impulses most explicitly in the three novels of
A Scots Quair, which recount political, economic, and cultural changes in
northeast Scotland before, during, and immediately following WWI. A Scots
Quair draws on the experimentation of MARCEL PROUST, JAMES JOYCE and
VIRGINIA WOOLF in its interweaving and interconnecting of past and present,
its emphasis on memory, and its modified narrative stream of consciousness.
The countryside becomes a character throughout the trilogy, throbbing with
life, the intensity of its colours evoking a FAUVE landscape. Narrated in a
regional dialect, the books follow their female protagonist, Chris Guthrie,
as she negotiates the political landscapes of progressively larger
communitiesfrom farming village to mill town to port city. The repression
of anti-WWI socialists in Sunset Song, the betrayals of unionizing mill
workers in Cloud Howe, and the increasingly violent labor conflicts in the
munitions factories of Grey Granite all pessimistically chart political
conflicts shaping 20th-century Scotland. Mitchell continually distinguishes
this cynical vision from the regions prehistoric inhabitants, represented
through the countrysides mysterious cairn circles. These neolithic
remnants hint at a lost golden age and serve as counterpoint to Chris
Guthries violent and unforgiving world.

In addition to A Scots Quair, his principal published work is Scottish
Scene (1934), a collection of creative writing and polemical essays co-
authored with MACDIARMID. He was also responsible for initiating
Routledges Voice of Scotland book series, which played an important part
in furthering Scottish writing in the interwar period. Mitchells two
science fiction novels, Three Go Back (1932) and Gay Hunter (1934), model
diffusionism through time travel. Both novels use science fiction to
imagine utopian cultures separated from modern civilization. Similarly, his
historical novels and archaeological adventures reinforce Mitchells
modernist pessimism by modeling different moments in a diffusionist
historical narrative. In Spartacus (1933), Rome serves as the foundations
for modern civilization not because of its cultural contributions, but
rather because of its exploitation of slave labor, linking the 1st-century
BCE slave rebellion to Mitchells 20th-century revolutionary impulses. In
The Lost Trumpet (1932), a search for the biblical instrument that toppled
the walls of Jericho symbolizes the civilized individuals revolutionary
capacities. Just as the trumpet destroyed cities, so too can mankind
destroy modernitys corruptions and return to an original state of grace.

Key Biographies of Lewis Grassic Gibbon
Campbell, I. (1985) Lewis Grassic Gibbon, Edinburgh: Scottish Academic
      Press.
Malcom, W. K. (1984) A Blasphemer & Reformer: A Study of James Leslie
      MitchellLewis Grassic Gibbon, Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press.
McCulloch, M. P and S. M. Dunnigan, eds. (2003) A Flame in the Mearns:
      Lewis Grassic Gibbon: A Centenary Celebration, Glasgow: Association
      for Scottish Literary Studies.
Munro, I. S. (1966) Leslie Mitchell: Lewis Grassic Gibbon, Edinburgh:
      Oliver & Boyd.

List of Works
Novels
Stained Radiance: A Fictionists Prelude (1930)
The 13th Disciple, Being Portrait and Saga of Malcolm Maudslay in his
      Adventure though the Dark Corridor (1931)
Three Go Back (1932)
The Lost Trumpet (1932)
Sunset Song (1932)  Volume 1 of A Scots Quair
Image and Superscriptions: A Novel (1933)
Cloud Howe (1933)  Volume 2 of A Scots Quair
Spartacus (1933)
Gay Hunter (1934)
Grey Granite (1934) Volume 3 of A Scots Quair

Short Story Collections
The Calends of Cairo (1931)
Persian Dawns, Egyptian Nights (1932)

Non-Fiction
Hanno: or the Future of Exploration, An Essay in Prophecy (1928)
Niger: The Life of Mungo Park (1934)
The Conquest of the Maya (1934)
Scottish Scene, or the Intelligent Mans Guide to Albyn (1934)  co-written
      with Hugh MacDiarmid
Nine Against the Unknown: A Record of Geographical Exploration (1934)

Anthologies
The Speak of the Mearns: Stories and Essays (1982)
Smeddum: A Lewis Grassic Gibbon Anthology (2001)

Paratextual Material
Grassic Gibbon Centre
(link to Grassic Gibbon Centres official website)
<http://www.grassicgibbon.com/>
Copyright: Grassic Gibbon Centre

Lewis Grassic Gibbon
(link to image of Lewis Grassic Gibbon)
<http://www.grassicgibbon.com/images/ggPhoto.png>
Copyright: Grassic Gibbon Centre

Sunset Song
(link to image of Sunset Song cover)
<http://us.penguingroup.com/static/covers/us/9780141188409H.jpg>
Copyright: Penguin

Contributor: Brian McAllister
