
GROUP THEATRE (1931-1941)

Founded in 1931 by Harold Clurman, Cheryl Crawford, and Lee Strasberg, the
Group Theatre was conceived as a company dedicated to staging socially
relevant plays, with a permanent ensemble of actors trained in a new,
shared technique. Its legacy can be located in the contributions it made to
modern American drama, particularly through the works of member-playwright
Clifford Odets, and through its practise of the Stanislavsky System, which
revolutionized American acting, developing into a psychologically realistic
approach widely known as the Method.

The Group had no manifesto, but Clurman articulated the founders shared
vision in fervent oratory. Damning the commercialism, poor material, and
inadequate acting of the moment, Clurman declared America has as yet no
Theatre (qtd. in Smith, 4), and he talked young artists into creating one.
Unity of production was a key goal, with all elementsacting, directing,
writing, and designcreating a coherent, meaningful whole. The Groups
modernist influences were many; Clurman and Strasberg were widely read,
inspired by artists like Jacques Copeau and Edward Gordon Craig, and most
powerfully influenced by Konstantin Stanislavsky and the Moscow Art
Theatre, whose work they had seen onstage, and whose theories they studied
at the American Laboratory Theatre.

With actor training a chief priority, the ensemble spent summers in the
country, experimenting with exercises and improvisations while rehearsing
plays. Paul Greens The House of Connelly (1931) marked their Broadway
debut; they also staged works by John Howard Lawson and Maxwell Anderson,
among others. Sidney Kingsleys Men in White (1933) was an early success,
widely praised for its realistic portrayal of doctors against Mordecai
Gorelicks abstract hospital setting.

The Groups mission reached its apotheosis in 1935, when it began to stage
Odetss plays. Most members were political progressives who lived and
worked together, sharing meals as well as ideals, and the collective found
its voice in Odets. Waiting for Lefty, set at a taxi drivers union
meeting, unfolds in episodes in which characters enact their struggles in
the depths of the Great Depression. The plays final, climactic moment
legendarily brought the audience to its feet, crying, Strike!, and the
Groups medium and message became one. Odetss other Group plays include
Awake and Sing (1935), Paradise Lost (1935), and Golden Boy (1937). He
captured the lives of the lower middle class, and of Jewish families in New
York in the 1930s; embracing leftist politics, he brought new subjects and
structures to modern American drama.

Economic pressures and internal disputes led to the Groups 1941 demise,
but its influence continued through its individual members. Notable names
include teachers Stella Adler, Bobby Lewis, Sanford Meisner, and Lee
Strasberg; actors Lee J. Cobb and Karl Malden; and director Elia Kazan. The
Group Theatre emblematized the spirit and struggle of the thirties, and
ushered in a new era of American drama on stage and screen, performed by a
new kind of actor.


References and Further Reading

Chinoy, Helen Krich. (1976) Reunion: A Self-Portrait of the Group Theatre,
reprinted from Educational Theatre Journal, 28 (4) (December): 443-552.

----- (2013) The Group Theatre: Passion, Politics, and Performance in the
Depression Era, ed. Don B. Wilmeth and Milly S. Barranger, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Clurman, Harold. (1945) The Fervent Years: The Story of the Group Theatre
and the Thirties, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Odets, Clifford. (1939) Six Plays of Clifford Odets, New York: Modern
Library.

Smith, Wendy. (1990) Real Life Drama: The Group Theatre and America, 1931-
1940, New York: Grove Weidenfeld.

Strasberg, Lee. (1987) A Dream of Passion: The Development of the Method,
Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

Rose Malague, University of Pennsylvania


Recommended Illustrations

[NOTE: Please use all four images for this important company if possible.
If not, please prioritize as follows: 1) Elia Kazan in Waiting for Lefty;
2) Poster for Awake and Sing; 3) Production photo of Men in White; photo of
Group Theatre founders.]


[pic]

Group Theatre founders Lee Strasberg, Harold Clurman, and Cheryl Crawford,
Brookfield Center, Connecticut, 1931.

[Source: New York Public Library. Online order form at
nypl.org/permissions. Please paste the following information into the
online order form:
Image ID: ps_the_2691
Title: Lee Strasberg, Harold Clurman, and Cheryl Crawford, Brookfield
Center.
Photographer: No Credit
Please contact permissions@nypl.org or 212-930-0091 w/ any ordering
questions.]



[pic]

The Group Theatres production of Sidney Kingsleys Men in White, 1933.
[Source: New York Public Library. Online order form at
nypl.org/permissions. Please paste the following information into the
online order form:
Image ID: 1607291
Title: Scene from the stage production Men in White.
Photographer: Vandamm.
Please contact permissions@nypl.org or 212-930-0091 w/ any ordering
questions.]



[pic]

Elia Kazan in the Group Theatre production of Clifford Odetss Waiting for
Lefty, 1935.
[Source: New York Public Library. Online order form at
nypl.org/permissions. Please paste the following information into the
online order form:
Image ID: psnypl_the_4323
Title: Scene from the stage production Waiting for Lefty
Photographer: Vandamm. Please contact permissions@nypl.org or 212-930-0091
w/ any ordering questions.]



[pic]

Poster for the Group Theatres production of Awake and Sing! by Clifford
Odets, 1935.
[Source: Museum of New York, available at:
http://collections.mcny.org/C.aspx?VP3=SearchResult_VPage&VBID=24UAYWPXZMU8&
SMLS=1&RW=1425&RH=724 ]
