
Anthology Film Archives

Kristen Alfaro (New York University)

Anthology Film Archives

Anthology Film Archives (Anthology  hereafter)  is  an  experimental  film
institution that was  founded  in  1970  by  experimental  filmmakers  Jonas
Mekas, Jerome Hill, Peter  Kubelka,  Stan  Brakhage,  James  Broughton,  Ken
Kelman, and film critic P. Adams Sitney. Based in the  Joseph  Papp  Theatre
in New York City, Anthology was funded primarily by Jerome  Hill.  According
to its founders, Anthology was the first film museum dedicated to  film  art
and, as stated in their manifesto, the  institution  aimed  to  define  film
study and exhibition with a film art canon (Essential Cinema) and a  theatre
(Invisible Cinema). In addition, Anthology created the Film Study Center,  a
space for  archiving,  preserving,  and  examining  films  and  film-related
journals, ephemera, and paper documents.

Link: http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/about/manifesto
1 manifesto Link to Anthology Film Archives Manifesto, 1970

Link: http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/about/essential-cinema
2 Essential Cinema Link to Essential Cinema description and film canon

Link: http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/collections/collections-landing
3 Film Study Center Link to Anthology Film Archives Collections overview

The Essential Cinema canon was chosen by a Film Selection Committee
composed of Anthologys founders. The committee utilized controversial
methods of selection based on their collective taste init was later
criticizedpredominantly male filmmakers.[1] Their methods garnered the
attention of critics and scholars and the canon became Anthologys most
famous endeavor.[2] Screened in the Invisible Cinema theatre, Essential
Cinema was presented in cycles and enabled the patrons to view a whole
history of art cinema in one institution.

Conceived by Peter Kubelka, the Invisible Cinema was a minimalist theatre
designed for concentrated viewing. It was furnished with hooded seats that
encapsulated the viewer and blocked external noise and visual distractions.
Such specifications were expensive to maintain and in 1973, Anthology
closed the theatre. After Jerome Hills death in 1972, Anthology struggled
to remain open with private and public funding. After a year, the
institution moved into 80 Wooster Street in SoHo, where it remained until
1978.[3]

Included in Anthologys original institutional goals, the Film Study Center
remained a lasting endeavor that helped Anthology obtain public funding. It
provided research and viewing space for students and enthusiasts, and
allowed Anthology to work with local and international university film
programs in order to expand and cultivate film research.


Anthology Film Archives brought experimental, art, and independent cinema
into the framework of a museological institution. Prior to 1970,
experimental films were screened primarily within itinerant spaces.[4]
Experimental filmmakers such as Mekas and Brakhage created films
antithetical to the aesthetic and narrative norms of popular cinema, which
were difficult to exhibit in commercial theatres. As independent filmmakers
continued to favour formal investigation over conventional narrative,
experimental film exhibition remained peripheral to commercial theatres and
modern art museums, and was largely limited to those who had access to
urban screenings or film societies.[5] Anthology placed experimental film
in a broader public sphere by creating a centralized space for its
exhibition and distribution.


References and Further Reading

Alfaro, K. (2012). Access and Experimental Film: Anthology Film Archives
Institutionalization of the Avant-Garde. The Moving Image 12.1: 44-64.
This article traces a history of experimental film access through the
development of Anthology Film Archives through to its contemporary archival
and preservation goals.

Bernstein R. and S. Shapiro (eds.) (2010) Illegal Living: 80 Wooster Street
and the Evolution of SoHo. Vilnius, Lithuania: Jono Meko Fondas. Provides
extensive archival documents and photographs of Anthology Film Archives
time at 80 Wooster Street in SoHo.

James, D. (ed.) (1992) To Free the Cinema: Jonas Mekas and the New York
Underground, ed. David James. Princeton: Princeton University Press. James
curates a seminal book of essays on Jonas Mekas, a central figure in
Anthologys history. Essays focus on Mekas role as a promoter, exhibitor,
and distributor of experimental film within the New York film community.

Sitney, P. A. (ed.) (1975) Essential Cinema. New York: Anthology Film
Archives and New York University Press. Anthology Film Archives first
publication, with Anthologys manifesto, the list of Essential Cinema
films, and essays by critics, scholars, and filmmakers on the films in the
canon.

Sitney, S. (2005) The Search for Invisible Cinema. Grey Room 19: 102-113.
This article provides an oral history of Invisible Cinema as told by
creator Peter Kubelka, Anthology founders, as well as theatre patrons.
-----------------------
[1] Out of ninety filmmakers, eighty-five were male and five were female
(Maya Deren, Marie Menken, Helen Levitt, Janice Loeb, and Leni
Riefenstahl).
[2] Constance Penley and Janet Bergstrom wrote one of the earliest feminist
criticisms of Essential Cinema, wherein they criticized the dominance of
New York experimental film critics. See Constance Penley, Janet Bergstrom,
and P. Adams Sitney, Letters from the Film Work Group, P. Adams Sitney,
Constance Penley, Janet Bergstrom. Screen 20 3  4 (1979): 149  159.
[3] During its hiatus from 80 Wooster Street, Anthology purchased the
courthouse on 2nd Avenue, Anthology launched a fundraising campaign for
renovations. From 1983  1988, Anthology screened films in the basement
auditorium of former Huntington Hartford Gallery of Modern Art on 59th
Street. Today, Anthology remains at the courthouse and continues to screen,
preserve, and archive films.
[4] For more on itinerant screens see, Tess Takahashis Experimental
Screens in the 1960s and 70s: The Site of Community. Cinema Journal Vol.
51, No. 2 (Winter 2012): 162-167.
[5] For more on the relationship between universities and experimental
cinema see Michael Zryds The Academy and the Avant-Garde: A Relationship
of Dependence and Resistance, Cinema Journal 45 no. 2 (Winter 2006): 17-42
and Experimental Film and the Development of Film Study in America.
Inventing Film Studies. Eds. Lee Grieveson and Haidee Wasson Durham: Duke
University Press, 2008, 182-216.


