
H.D. (Hilda Doolittle) (1886-1961)

Perhaps best known as one of the founding imagists, H.D. was also a
novelist, essayist, and actor active throughout the entire modernist
period.  From her early, iconic lyrics to her late, mythological long
poems, H.D. developed an aesthetic that bridged free verse, classicism, and
new conceptions of identity, most notably gender and sexuality.  In
addition to her own work, H.D. helped shape modernism through her many
friendships with other important artists and intellectuals, including Ezra
Pound, Marianne Moore, D.H. Lawrence, and Sigmund Freud.

H.D. was born Hilda Doolittle in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, not far from
Philadelphia.  Her father was an astronomer, and her mother, Helen, had
some artistic aspirations, including painting and singing.  Among her early
acquaintances were Pound (to whom she was briefly engaged) and Williams.
While attending Bryn Mawr for a year, she met Moore.  In 1911, she went to
England with Frances Gregg, with whom she had an early and important
romantic relationship.

One of the more iconic moments in modernism occurred in 1912, when Pound
declared Doolittle, Richard Aldington, and himself to be imagists during
a gathering at the British Museum tearoom.  Later that same year, Pound
sent some of Doolittles verses to Poetry magazine, signing them H.D.,
imagiste, a name she would embrace.  H.D. married Aldington in 1913,
although the union was largely an unhappy one.  During this time, she
developed a close friendship with Lawrence, which ended abruptly in 1918,
under circumstance still not entirely clear.

In 1919, H.D. became quite ill while pregnant with her only child, a
daughter, Frances Perdita.  She was nursed to health by Annie Winifred
Ellerman, also known as Bryher, who would become a life-long partner and
travel companion.  In 1927, Bryher married Kenneth Macpherson, and, along
with H.D., the three became a creative and domestic unit, collaborating on
films and the journal Close Up, for which H.D. wrote articles and reviews.
In 1933-34, another significant relationship was forged when H.D. was
analyzed by Freud, an experience she recounts in A Tribute to Freud (1956).
 She was living in England during World War II and experienced the bombing
of London, an event that inspired her long poem Trilogy.

In her early poetry, which shared many but not all of Pounds imagist
principles, H.D. deliberately reworked classical sources, particularly
Greek, into compressed lyrics that attended to the material world.  In her
first collection, Sea Garden (1916), the fractured garden and battered sea
of the title are used as a setting for erotic displacement, ancient
deities, and sacred rituals.  This concern with the classical would expand
in her later verse, moving beyond imagist moments in time to create
longer narrative and personal forms.  Eurydice, for instance, is a
dramatic monologue retelling the myth from the perspective of the female
character, chidings Orpheus for his failures.  H.D. would assume the
perspective of neglected womens voice throughout her career, most notably
in her late long poem Helen in Egypt (1961).

Along with her verse, H.D. composed a number of prose works, including
Palimpsest (1926) and HERmione (1927).  Through their plot and characters,
these fictions often staged the dilemmas of H.D.s writing and identity,
including her lesbian relationships.  Indeed, she chose to withhold some of
these texts from publication, in part due to their frank treatment of
lesbian sexuality.  She also wrote several autobiographical works,
including The Gift (1941-43) and Tribute to Freud (1956), the latter taking
psychoanalysis as an opportunity to layer personal and cultural history,
archetypes, ancient symbols, and the family drama.

This palimpsestic approach to myth and the psyche became more pronounced in
H.D.s later work, a flexible version of the mythic method that embraced
fluid identities and cultural hybridity while providing a lens to interpret
the present.  In her Trilogycomprised of The Walls Do Not Fall (1944),
Tribute to the Angels (1945), and The Flowering of the Rod (1946)H.D. uses
Egyptian and Christian iconography to comprehend the destruction of London
during World War II.  The alternative (at times occult) history she
generates in this work anticipates Helen in Egypt, perhaps the culminating
expression of her lifelong interests.  The poem takes as its starting point
a fragment by the Greek poet Stesichorus, who suggests that Helen had been
transported to Egypt during the famous war, a phantom taking her place.
Thus, as the narrator remarks, The Greeks and the Trojans alike fought for
an illusion.  The work is constructed as a lyrical sequence, with speakers
ranging from Helen and Achilles to a number of other classical figures.
Thematically, H.D. is able to blend many ancient symbols and religions
under the sign of mutation, as the Egyptian Amen becomes the Greek Zeus,
Thesis transformed to Isis and Aphrodite.

Although she was actively writing until her death in 1961, H.D. was often
neglected in early accounts of canonical modernism.  Since the late 1960s,
however, her work has been recognized for its formal and thematic
complexity, firmly establishing her place within modernism as an artistic
and cultural movement.

Recent Editions and Select Criticism
Many of H.D.s central works remain in print, published by New Directions.
Diana Collecott, H.D. and Sapphic Modernism, 1910-1950 (Cambridge:
      Cambridge UP, 1999)
Susan Stanford Friedman and Rachel Blau DuPlessis, eds., Signets: Reading
      H.D. (Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1990)
Barbara Guest, Herself Defined: The Poet H.D. and Her World (New York:
      Doubleday, 1984)
Donna Krolik Hollenberg, ed., H.D. and Poets After (Iowa City, IA: U of
      Iowa P, 2000)
Robinson, Janice S. H.D.: The Life and Work of an American Poet (Boston:
      Houghton Mifflin, 1982)

