
Rhoda Woets
E. r.woets@vu.nl
Word count, including references: 503


Kofi Antubam, Kofi

Kofi Antubam (1922-1964) was one of the most influential pioneering modern
artists in Ghana. His realistic, narrative scenes in wall paintings and
mosaics of an idealized African life have influenced a great number of
artists after him. Antubam was appointed as an official state artist after
Ghanas independence in 1957. This was not surprising as Antubam was firmly
convinced that artists should contribute to national pride and development
and present Ghana in their art work as a modern nation with a unique past
and culture. Antubam received his art education at Achimota School in
Accra, and  Goldsmith College in London. He exhibited his work in Ghana and
in cities such as London, Paris, Rome and Dsseldorf as well as in New
York. Antubam challenged contemporary artists to use the skills of their
European based art training as a tool in painting cultural portraits of
African traditional culture. A representational art style, he argued, was
only a vehicle to express what lay within, and this shows how modern and
progressive the artist was. Assimilation was the key-word for Antubam in
the development of a national and African identity that despite the
assimilation of foreign elements- he argued, would remain distinct from
East and West.

Antubam received his art education at Achimota School in Accra, and the
Goldsmith College in London. He exhibited his work in Ghana and in cities
such as London, Paris, Rome and Dsseldorf as well as in New York. Antubam
challenged contemporary artists to use the skills of their European based
art training as a tool in painting cultural portraits of African
traditional culture. A representational art style, he argued, was only a
vehicle to express what lay within, and that showed how modern and
progressive the artist was. Assimilation was the key-word for Antubam in
the development of a national and African identity that despite the
assimilation of foreign elements- he argued, would remain distinct from
East and West.

Already during his school days in Achimota Kofi Antubam painted cultural
scenes on the college walls. Many murals and paintings would follow and
most of them were romanticized scenes of everyday (village) life or royal
depictions of chiefs with their linguists. Artistically, Antubam was
inspired by traditional institutions of royalty and concepts of beauty:
oval shaped heads, majestic repose, and rounded figures. Antubams
paintings of prosperous, culturally rich villages, are seemingly
undisturbed by colonial encounters, or by the first president Kwame
Nkrumahs s modernisation projects.

Antubam was one of the first artists to introduce adinkra symbols in the
fine arts which he used in the commissioned works of the new government in
power in the early sixties. Adinkra are a set of local symbols that are
imprinted on cotton cloth and mostly worn at funerals. Antubam used adinkra
symbols in, amongst others, the panelled doors of the legislative assembly
in Accra and three chairs for state ceremonies (Fig. 2).  Adinkra symbols
apply in all these nationalistic objects as decorative designs representing
Kwame Nkrumahs national and Pan-African ideals.

Antubam died of a stroke at the age of 42 and was granted a state burial.



References and further reading

Antubam, K. (1963), Ghanas Heritage of Culture Leipzig: Koehler & Amelang.

Bedu-Addo, A. (1977), Kofi Antubam. His life and work In: Sankofa Arts
and Culture Magazine, p.16-20 Accra: Arts Council of Ghana.

Fosu, K. (1993), 20th Century Art of Africa (revised edition). Kumasi:
Design press, University of Science and Technology.

Mount, M. W. (1973), African Art. The Years Since 1920. Devon: Davis &
Charles Holdings limited.



                                    [pic]

      1. Kofi Antubam, How Much (detail), oil on board, 1954.
      Collection: National Museum in Accra/ Ghana Museums and Monuments
      Board Ghana. Photograph taken by author.


                                    [pic]
      2. Kofi Antubam, Chair of State, 1960.
      Collection: National Museum in Accra/ Ghana Museums and Monuments
      Board Ghana. Photograph taken by author.

