

Fua Haripitak was a modern Thai artist recognised for his pioneering role in modern Thai painting and his contribution to preserving classical Thai art. He was generally considered to be an avant-garde artist in his time, as he constantly challenged academic conventions and experimented with many artistic styles including Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and Cubism. As a student of Silpa Bhirasri (1892-1962), Haripitak never stopped learning, exploring new methods or drawing new inspirations from both Thailand and abroad throughout his lifetime. His works of art are noted for their thick, bold brushstrokes and vivid colours, through which he aimed to capture impressions and experiences of different places and the moods of each moment. His 1949 landscape painting Petchaburi won him the Gold Medal Award from Thailand’s First National Exhibition of Art the same year. Haripitak won three consecutive first prize awards in painting from the National Exhibition of Arts. In 1985, he was awarded the National Artist of Thailand in Fine Art and Visual Art.

Fua Haripitak was a modern Thai artist recognised for his pioneering role in modern Thai painting and his contribution to preserving classical Thai art. He was generally considered to be an avant-garde artist in his time, as he constantly challenged academic conventions and experimented with many artistic styles including Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and Cubism. As a student of Silpa Bhirasri (1892-1962), Haripitak never stopped learning, exploring new methods or drawing new inspirations from both Thailand and abroad throughout his lifetime. His works of art are noted for their thick, bold brushstrokes and vivid colours, through which he aimed to capture impressions and experiences of different places and the moods of each moment. His 1949 landscape painting Petchaburi won him the Gold Medal Award from Thailand’s First National Exhibition of Art the same year. Haripitak won three consecutive first prize awards in painting from the National Exhibition of Arts. In 1985, he was awarded the National Artist of Thailand in Fine Art and Visual Art.

 

Haripitak was born in Thonburi (now part of Bangkok). His father was a court painter who served under Phraya Anusat Chitrakorn, one of the great masters of the court of King Rama VI. In 1929, Haripitak began his studies at Poh Chang School, where he learnt basic art practices for four years, after which he left as he found the teaching method too academic. In 1933, Haripitak met Silpa Bhirasri, the founder of Praneet Silpakam School (the School of Fine Arts) and decided to study at this newly established institution. However, after only one year, he resigned and asked to be personally trained by Silpa Bhirasri. Impressed by Haripitak’s attitude, individuality, and most importantly his exceptional drawing skill, Bhirasri agreed to be his tutor. Under Bhirasri’s tuition, 

Haripatak developed a style which employed rapid strokes in an impressionistic manner in his early works, such as Professor Feroci (1935) and My Grandmother (1938).



File: haripitak1.jpg

1 Fua Haripitak, My Grandmother (1938), Collection of Mr. Khanchai Boonpan. (A Century of Fua Haripitak: Life and Works, 2010)

From 1940 to 1946, he studied at Visva Bharati University at Santiniketan in West Bengal, India. His experience in India led to an interest in ancient art that eventually grew into his devotion to the restoration of Thai mural painting during his later years. Upon his return, Haripitak worked as a professor at Silpakorn University from 1947 to 1970. Despite working full time, Haripitak produced numerous artworks throughout his career. In 1954 he was awarded a scholarship from the Italian Government to study at the Academia de Bella Arti di Roma for two years, during which he adopted a Cubist style. The subjects of his artworks during this period were mostly cityscapes and nude figures as seen in Snow in St. Peter’s Square (1955) and Blue and Green Reflexes (1956) which foregrounded the technical and stylistic aspects of his work through the simplification of natural forms into geometric forms.



After retirement, Haripitak spent his time restoring Thai mural paintings in various temples. He died on 19 October 1993.

Further reading:

(Viriyapanit)



(Bussarakamwadee)