
Hassam, Childe (1859-1935)

Along with Mary Cassatt and William Merritt Chase, Frederick Childe Hassam
is one of the United States best-known Impressionist artists. Hassam
enjoyed a successful and prolific career as a painter of fashionable city
streets and New England scenery. He was one of the founders of The Ten, a
group of artists whose annual exhibitions popularized the Impressionist
style in the United States. Born in Boston, Hassam began his career as a
wood engravers apprentice, then worked independently as a childrens book
illustrator. In 1882 Hassam had his first solo exhibition, displaying
watercolors of Boston and Nantucket views at the Williams and Everett
Gallery.
Around that time Hassam took formal art classes at the Lowell Institute and
the Boston Art Club, and in 1883 he took his first extended tour of Europe,
finding particular inspiration in the work of British watercolorists.
Marrying and settling into Bostons newly fashionable Back Bay in 1885, he
began painting large views of the city under various atmospheric
conditions. Executed in warm earth tones, these canvases reflected the
tonalism of the American artist William Morris Hunt as well as French
artists such as Gustave Caillebotte, who blended academic techniques with
Impressionist subject matter.

From 1886 to 1889, Hassam studied at the Academie Julian in Paris and came
to know the work of many of his European contemporaries. He now specialised
in Parisian street scenes, many featuring gardens and flower shops,
including Geraniums (The Hyde Collection, Glens Falls, New York), shown at
the 1888 Paris Salon. During this time his palette lightened dramatically
and he began to adapt the freer brushwork, softer colors, and light-
suffused scenes of French Impressionists.
In 1889 Hassam moved to New York City, where for the next decade he
depicted the citys fashionable parks and streets. He exhibited frequently
and was accepted to New Yorks most current artistic circles, including the
Society of American Artists.
Beginning in summer 1890, Hassam made the first of many visits to Appledore
Island, NH, where he painted his friend the poet Celia Thaxters summer
home and garden, using brilliant colors mostly straight out of the tube;
these remain some of his most popular works. Hassams popular views of old
New Englands fishing harbors, colonial homes, seaside cottages, and white
washed churches, while painted in a modern impressionist idiom, conveyed a
sense of American tradition, patriotism, and social stability. As such,
they contrasted with the Realist scenes of Robert Henri, John Sloan, and
the Ashcan School, which portrayed the dramatic changes in urban life in
the twentieth century. Later in his career, Hassam retreated to more
secluded themes, such as elegant apartments with contemplative women gazing
out a window and nude figures imbued with symbolic meaning. He also
increasingly turned to etching and lithography. He died in his home in
Southampton, Long Island, in 1935, bequeathing his artistic estate to the
American Academy of Arts and Letters.


References and further reading

Curry, D. P. (1990) Childe Hassam: An Island Garden Revisited.  Denver:
Denver Art Museum in association with W. W. Norton.

Weinberg, H. B. (2004) Childe Hassam: American Impressionist. New York:
Metropolitan Museum of Art and New Haven: Yale University Press.


[pic]

Winter in Union Square, 188990

Childe Hassam (American, 18591935)

Oil on canvas; 18 1/4 x 18 in. (46.4 x 45.7 cm)

Gift of Ethelyn McKinney, in memory of her brother, Glenn Ford McKinney,
1943 (43.116.2)
http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/43.116.2

