

Faiq Hassan was among the pioneers of Iraqi modern art. Along with Jewad Selim and Hafidh al-Droubi, Hassan held a premier position in the development of the modern art movement in Iraq and had a major influence on succeeding generations. 



Born in Baghdad, Hassan became interested in art at a young age. His talent was evident and he became the second recipient of a government scholarship to study art abroad. While studying at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Hassan was exposed to European modernism and produced copies of masterworks. When he returned to Baghdad after receiving his degree in 1938, Hassan took a position at the Institute of Fine Arts as the director of the Department of Painting and Sculpture. In this position, Hassan was able to focus on the education of young Iraqi artists, and he went to great lengths to ensure that his students had adequate equipment and instruction. 

Faiq Hassan was among the pioneers of Iraqi modern art. Along with Jewad Selim and Hafidh al-Droubi, Hassan held a premier position in the development of the modern art movement in Iraq and had a major influence on succeeding generations. 



Born in Baghdad, Hassan became interested in art at a young age. His talent was evident and he became the second recipient of a government scholarship to study art abroad. While studying at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Hassan was exposed to European modernism and produced copies of masterworks. When he returned to Baghdad after receiving his degree in 1938, Hassan took a position at the Institute of Fine Arts as the director of the Department of Painting and Sculpture. In this position, Hassan was able to focus on the education of young Iraqi artists, and he went to great lengths to ensure that his students had adequate equipment and instruction. 



Hassan was also an active member of several art groups, including the Society of the Friends of Art. In 1950, he formed his own artist collective known as the Pioneers, or Al-Ruwad. Beginning under the name Société Primitive, this group started as an informal assembly of artists who explored the Iraqi countryside for inspiration and subject matter. Hassan also founded the short-lived Al-Zawiya Group in the 1960s. Known as the ‘master,’ Hassan worked towards achieving technical expertise in his art that would be revered by his students and colleagues. He moved freely between realism and abstraction, but favoured Iraqi workers, villagers, horsemen, and landscapes as subject matter.    

Further reading:

 (Ali)



(Jabra)



(Modern Art Iraq Archive)



(Naef)



(Shabout)