
John Heartfield (1891-1968)

John Heartfield (pseudonym of Helmut Herzfeld) was a pioneer of
photomontage, whose work spanned magazines, books, theatre set design,
film, and political posters. His earliest photomontages appeared in the
context of Berlin Dada, where he produced montages for Dada magazines and
collaborative works with artist George Grosz characterized by whirling
centrifugal compositions, disjunctive pictorial syntax, and ironic text-
image commentaries. He continued to develop the form in his innovative book
jacket covers for his brother Wieland Herzfeldes Malik Verlag, a left-wing
publishing company, which sought to appeal to the consumer with visually-
provocative dust covers that crystallized the books narrative in
compositions reminiscent of film stills. The originality of Heartfields
book jacket covers won him admiration from the intelligentsia and
commercial sectors alike, such that the essayist Kurt Tucholsky once wrote:
If I werent Peter Panther, I would like to be a dust jacket at the Malik
publishing company. That John Heartfield is really a small wonder of the
world. Tucholsky would collaborate with Heartfield in 1929 on the
satirical book Deutschland, Deutschland ber Alles, which pilloried the
Weimar Republic through critical juxtapositions of prose and photography.
      An active member of the German Communist Party, Heartfield wielded his
skills in photomontage to produce eye-catching election posters and
montages for the Party paper Die rote Fahne (The Red Flag). He played a
pivotal editorial role on the Communist Partys satirical paper Der
Knppel, (The Cudgel), manufacturing witty photomontages for the journal.
Heartfield also produced set designs for radical playwright Erwin
Piscators Proletarian Theatre.
      By 1929, Heartfields renown was such that his work was showcased in a
one-man room in the groundbreaking Film und Foto (FIFO) exhibition, mounted
by the German Werkbund in Stuttgart as a platform to display significant
innovations in lens-based media. Heartfields impressive showing at the
FIFO preceded the work that would comprise most widely known and imitated
work, namely over 200 photomontages that he produced for the pro-Communist
Arbeiter-Illustrierte Zeitung (AIZ) between 1929 and 1938. Painstakingly
assembled, re-photographed and reproduced in photogravure, Heartfields AIZ
montages were visually welded, seamless compositions that imitated yet
parodied photography. Not only did these pictures satirize his political
opponents, the Socialists and the National Socialists, they also sought to
produce critical consumers of photographic image. With the advent of
National Socialism in 1933, Heartfield fled Germany for Prague,
Czechoslovakia, where he joined the rest of the AIZ staff. From exile,
Heartfield continued to issue his scathing satires of National Socialism in
the AIZ until 1938, when Germany invaded Czechoslovakia.
      Forced to flee Prague, Heartfield relocated to England, where he
continued to exhibit and produce photomontages, including book jackets for
Penguin Books Ltd. He returned to the German Democratic Republic in 1950.
As a Western emigrant, his re-entry was troubled and his work marginalized
because of potential treasonable connections and his collaboration with
AIZ publisher Willi Mnzenberg who fell afoul of Stalins Communist Party.
Following the cultural liberalization that accompanied Stalins death and
Nikita Khrushchevs rule, Heartfield received an honorary professorship, a
peace prize, and the Karl Marx Order.

References and further reading:

David Evans, John Heartfield, AIZ/VI 1930-1938, (New York: Kent Fine Art,
1991).

Sabine Kriebel, Manufacturing Discontent:  John Heartfields Mass Medium,
special     issue Dada and Photomontage across Borders, New German
Critique 36 (2107), Summer 2009, pp. 53-88.

Roland Mrz, Der Schnitt entlang der Zeit, (Dresden: VEB Verlag der Kunst,
1981).

Peter Pachnicke, ed., John Heartfield, (Cologne, DuMont, 1991). A condensed
English-language version of the catalogue was published by: New York:
Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1992.

Andrs Mario Zervign, A Political Struwwelpeter? John Heartfields
Early Film Animation and the Crisis of Photographic Representation, New
German Critique 107, Vol. 36, No. 2, Summer 2009

