

Chairil Anwar (Medan, 1922 – Jakarta, 1949) is known in Indonesia as the Poet of the Revolution. His life and work epitomize not only the turmoil of the Japanese occupation of the Dutch Indies and Indonesia’s struggle for Independence but also the radical transformations in the use of Malay, the national language of Indonesia since August 17, 1945. Until today, Chairil, bohemian and wanderer, is seen as the model of the so-called Angkatan ’45 (the Generation of ‘45), a diffuse group of authors and intellectuals in Jakarta who shared little more than a cautiously expressed desire to create a novel Indonesian culture that was to transcend colonial as well as regional cultures; they claimed to be ‘the heirs of world culture’ and Chairil, western educated and well-aware of Malay writing traditions, certainly was one of them. 

Chairil Anwar (Medan, 1922 – Jakarta, 1949) is known in Indonesia as the Poet of the Revolution. His life and work epitomize not only the turmoil of the Japanese occupation of the Dutch Indies and Indonesia’s struggle for Independence but also the radical transformations in the use of Malay, the national language of Indonesia since August 17, 1945. Until today, Chairil, bohemian and wanderer, is seen as the model of the so-called Angkatan ’45 (the Generation of ‘45), a diffuse group of authors and intellectuals in Jakarta who shared little more than a cautiously expressed desire to create a novel Indonesian culture that was to transcend colonial as well as regional cultures; they claimed to be ‘the heirs of world culture’ and Chairil, western educated and well-aware of Malay writing traditions, certainly was one of them. 



Between his first poem, Nisan, dedicated to his departed grandmother – ‘sorrow Most High reigns’ - and his final poem, Derai-derai Cemara , a retrospect on his own short life –‘rustling spruce trees, falling needles, far and farther, day turns into night, it seems’ - Chairil completed some ten short prose writings on the possibilities of composing pure poetry and some eighty poems on a wide variety of topics of contemporary urban life, driven by violence and impermanence and their complements, individualism and opportunism. The poems are constructed around what he himself calls with an Indonesian neologism kernwoorden, ‘nuclear words’ which, staccato-like, juxtaposed into slightly rhyming lines of various length, shape ‘complete worlds on their own’ and ‘postpone death and defeat.’ So, too, with his prose writings: ‘Now it is Hoppla! Jump as far as possible, full of youthful vigour for this youthful nation! The Word is the Truth. The Word does not have two masters! The Word is its own thesis!’



Chairil is still appreciated as the most important poet of Indonesia; April 28, the date of his death, is now Chairil Anwar Day when his work is celebrated nation-wide in discussions about modern Indonesian literature and poetry readings in which Aku - Me - has become the ultimate classic: ‘I am a wild animal, evicted from the herd – I want to live another thousand years.’



List of Works

Publications

Deru Campur Debu (Jakarta, 1949) and Kerikil Tajam dan Yang Terampas dan Yang Putus (Jakarta, 1949); with Asrul Sani and Rivai Apin, Tiga Menguak Takdir (Jakarta, 1950). 

Translations

Burton Raffel, The Voice of the Night: Complete Poetry and Prose of Chairil Anwar. Revised Edition. (1993). 

Further reading:

[Enter citations for further reading here]