Sam Bardaouil



706 words



Henein, Georges (1914-1973)



Henein’s father Sadik Henein Pacha was an Egyptian diplomat. His mother was Mary Zanelli an Italian-Egyptian woman. His father’s career meant that he would spend his childhood between Cairo, Madrid, Rome and Paris where he eventually completed his secondary education at the Lycée Pasteur de Neuilly and went on to study at the Sorbonne. This early cosmopolitanism allowed him to equally master Arabic, Italian, Greek, English and French. This in turn enabled him to navigate the various worlds in which he roamed with ease and confidence. Georges Henein’s Surrealist and leftist leanings begin to surface in 1935 through his contributions to two publications: Un Effort, a monthly periodical published in Cairo by Les Essayistes, a Francophone literary group and Les Humbles, a Marxist-Leninist journal that was printed in Paris. In 1936, Henein meets Breton. In a letter dated April 8, 1936 Breton already reveals to Henein his awareness of the latter’s efforts to promulgate Surrealism in Egypt: “The imp of the perverse, as he deigns to appear to me, seems to have one wing here, the other in Egypt.” Later in the same year, and during Henein’s sojourn in Paris, he attends the Surrealist meetings that Breton called for to discuss and take a stand towards what became known as the Moscow Trials. A manifesto, or more precisely a declaration, entitled La Verité Sur Le Procès de Moscou was read by Breton in a meeting on the 3rd of September of 1936 and was signed by those present. Henein was one of the signatories. Henein Left Cairo in 1947 and settled in Paris where he co-directed the Surrealist liaison office until 1948 when he distanced himself from the Surrealists of France due to political disagreement. Upon his permanent exile to France in 1962 by the Government of Gamal Abdel Nasser, he shifted into Journalism writing predominantly for L’Express and Jeune Afrique. 



Bibliography:



Alexandrain, Saranne (1981), Georges Henein (Poètes d’aujourd’hui), Paris, Seghers. 



Henein, Georges, “Le chant des violents” (June 1935), “Vive la catalogne” and “Si on ne le pend pas” (December 1936), “Projet d'un monument international” (November 1937), from Les Humbles (Paris, September-October 1936).



Henein, Georges (1935), “De L’Irréalisme,” from Un Effort, Cairo. 



Henein, Georges (1981), Lettres: Georges Henein - Henri Calet (Grandes Largeurs), Paris, Association Henri Calet.