Hindi Parallel Cinema



Hindi Parallel Cinema refers to Indian art cinema made in the Hindi language. As with Indian Parallel Cinema, it is mostly defined through its ideological opposition to Popular Indian Cinema. More specifically, it refers to the “New Cinema Movement” (roughly from 1969 to 1985), which might be described as a historical moment when the impact of this art cinema was both nationally and internationally at its height. Major figures include Shyam Benegal, Kumar Shahani, Mani Kaul, Govind Nihalani, Saeed Akhtar Mirza, Ketan Mehta, Kundan Shah, Vidhu Vinod Chopra, Sudhir Mishra, Kamal Swaroop, Rabindra Dharmaraj, Prakash Jha, Avtar Kaul, Ramesh Sharma, Aruna-Vikas and Sai Paranjpe (though not all of these work(ed) in Hindi exclusively).



Both the Parallel and New Cinemas originate mainly in Bengal, with filmmaker Satyajit Ray as the key representative.  establishment of institutions such as the International Film Festival of India (IFFI, 1952-), the Film Finance Corporation (FFC, 1960-; in 1975 renamed and restructured as the National Film Development Council, NFDC) and the Film Training Institute of India (FTII, 1960-; later renamed Film and Television Institute of India),



Hindi-language art cinema emerged in the late 1960s and early 1970s, consolidating itself with the early successes of director Shyam Benegal (especially Ankur released in 1974).



 In the following years, its capital Bombay became one of the centres of Indian art filmmaking alongside Bengal, Kerala and Karnataka.



Maybe because of its proximity to the mainstream industry, the Hindi parallel films tend to be more open to generic and commercial elements than their counterparts from Bengal or Kerala. The so-called ‘Middle-of-the-road Cinema’ by filmmakers such as Basu Chatterjee (Rajnigandha, 1974) or Mahesh Bhatt (Arth, 1982), too, established itself most forcefully in the Hindi-language film industry because of this proximity. However, the early successes could not be sustained for long and a period of decline began in the mid-1980s, considerably reinforced by a string of commercial hits of a reinvigorated Popular Hindi Cinema in the late eighties. While both parallel and middle-of-the-road films continued (and continue) to be made in Hindi, they lost much of their cultural significance.



Facilitated by the corporatisation of the Bombay film industry, the early 2000s saw the emergence of what has been labelled as ‘Hindi indies’ or ‘Multiplex Cinema’. While, in Western contexts, “multiplex” stands mostly for Hollywood blockbusters, in India, it has become an exhibition platform where more variety and choice of product is possible. Seminal films include Company (2002, Ram Gopal Varma), Black Friday (2004, Anurag Kashyap), Khosla Ka Ghosla (2006, Dibakar Banerjee) and Bheja Fry (2007, Sagar Ballari) among others. Although these films are repeatedly referred to as Parallel Cinema, their inclusion is problematic. A rather vague term from the production angle, the multiplex film might be most productively defined by the specific audience it is targeting: a Westernised urban middle-class. Thus, the ‘Hindi indies’ are marked by very different aesthetic sensibilities and thematic concerns from the traditional parallel films, and mostly lack any form of oppositional stance so characteristic of Indian art cinema.





References and further reading:

Athique, A.; Hill D. (2010) The Multiplex in India. A cultural economy of urban leasure, London and New York: Routledge.



Banerjee, S. (1982) New Indian Cinema, New Delhi: Directorate of Film Festivals, National Film Development Corporation.



Barnouw, E.; Krishnaswamy S. (1980 [1963]) Indian Film. Second Edition, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.



Das Gupta, C. (1980) “New Directions in Indian Cinema”, Film Quarterly 34 (1): 32-42.



----- (1983) “The “New” Cinema: A Wave or a Future?”, Indian Cinema Superbazaar, eds. A. Vasudev; P. Lenglet, New Delhi: Vikas, 39-49.



Datta, S. (2008) Shyam Benegal, London: BFI.



Hood, J.W. (2009 [2002]) The Essential Mystery. Major Filmmakers of Indian Art Cinema. Second revised and enlarged edition, New Delhi: Orient BlackSwan.



Needham, A.D. (2013) New Indian Cinema in Post-Independence India: The Cultural Work of Shyam Benegal’s Films, London and New York: Routledge.



Vasudev, A. (1986) The New Indian Cinema, New Delhi: Macmillan.





Stefan Borsos

University of Cologne, Cologne