
HANNAH HCH (1889-1978)

[pic]

Hannah Hch was a German painter and photomontagist who also worked in
modern domestic handicraft, fabric and fashion design. She is primarily
known for the photomontages she made during the early part of her artistic
career, when she was the only female member of the revolutionary avant-
garde group Berlin Dada (1916-1922). Hchs works were, on the whole, less
stridently political than those of her fellow Dadaists, who, in addition to
their literary and artistic creations, conveyed their revolutionary ideas
in public demonstrations and written manifestos. In contrast, Hch focused
primarily on her art, often meshing the domestic realm with the public
sphere of Dada. By interweaving these two seemingly disparate realms, the
artist was better able to examine constructions of female identity and
gender relations. Hch resided in or around Berlin for most of her life.
Over the span of her fifty-two year career her style shifted from social
commentary to surrealism to abstraction, a progression which makes her
uvre impervious to art historical categorization.

Early Life
Hannah Hch was born Anna Therese Joanne Hch in Gotha, Germany. Her father
was an insurance salesman and her mother was an amateur painter. At the age
of 22, in 1914, Hch moved to Berlin and entered the Kunstgewerbeschule
(School of Applied Arts) in the Berlin suburb of Charlottenberg, where she
studied glass design with Harold Bengen and calligraphy with Ludwig
Stterlin. Her studies were interrupted by the onset of World War 1, at
which time she returned for several months to Gotha and worked for the Red
Cross. In 1915, Hch returned to Berlin, enrolling at the
Unterrichtsanstalt des Kniglichen Kunstgewerbemuseums (School of Royal
Museum of Applied Arts). She entered the graphics and bookbinding program
of the well-known Jugendstil artist Emil Orlik, with whom she focused on
collage techniques. She also enrolled in evening figure drawing and
calligraphy courses. That same year, Hch became romantically involved with
the Austrian-born Dada writer and artist Raoul Hausmann, who introduced her
to the literary and artistic circle of Club Dada, an avant-garde movement
that was active from 1916 until 1922. The groups members, which included
Johannes Baader, Georg Grosz, John Heartfield, Richard Huelsenbeck, and
Hausmann, showcased their collective activities in exhibitions, multi-media
events, and demonstrations.

In 1918, Hch, together with Hausmann, invented photomontage, a technique
in which photographic cutouts from mass media magazines are used as sources
for constructed images. For the Dadaists, photomontage was an artistic
response to the social and economic chaos caused by World War I. It also
served as an anti-academic alternative to German Expressionism, the
dominant art movement in Germany at the time. Hch always earned a living
while involved with the Dadaists. In 1916 she was hired at Ullstein Verlag,
the largest publisher in Berlin. Until 1926, she worked three days a week
as a pattern designer and writer on womens handicrafts.

Career
Hchs output was prolific throughout her lifetime, but she is best-known
for her work during the Dada years. Her most famous photomontage is SCHNITT
MIT DEM KCHENMESSER DADA DURCH DIE LETZTE WEIMARER BIERBAUCHKULTUREPOCHE
DEUTSCHLANDS (Cut with the Kitchen Knife Dada through the Last era of the
Weimar Beer-Belly Cultural Epoch of Germay), 1919-1920, which captures the
social and political chaos of postwar Germany.

[pic]

This large and multifaceted work combines figures from the Wilhelmine
Empire, the military, as well as leading politicians from the moderate
Weimar Republic. At the lower right section of the montage are Communists,
political radicals, and the Dadaists. These mostly male figures are paired
with photographic fragments of active, sporty womenice skaters, dancers,
divers, and actresseswho enliven the piece both aesthetically and
conceptually. With these female figures, Hch called to mind the recent
enfranchisement of German women, who had been granted suffrage in 1919. The
title itself suggests that women, traditionally relegated to the kitchen,
could now cut through the beer-belly culture of Weimar Germany. Cut With
the Kitchen Knife, along with several other of Hchs work, were featured
in the First International Dada Fair of 1920.

Hchs Dada years were formative, but she went on to chart an independent
course in her work that moved beyond the politically radical topics of her
Dada contemporaries. In fact, as Berlin Dada eventually self-destructed in
1922 due to internal jealousies, Hchs painting and photomontage styles
continued to evolve. Throughout the 1910s and 1920s, she produced a large
number of oil paintings, watercolors, and gouaches that were influenced by
leading aesthetic movements of the period, including Orphism,
Constructivism, Futurism, Expressionism, and Cubism. It was with
photomontage, however, that Hch was able to forge new artistic ground.
After her break with Hausmann in 1922, Hch began to focus almost
exclusively on female identity and gender relations. Some of her most
famous works dealing with gender include DA DANDY, 1919, DAS SCHNE MDCHEN
(The Beautiful Girl), 1919-1920, and DADA-TANZ (Dada Ball), 1922.
[pic]

Da-Dandy

Throughout her fifty-three years of artistic production, Hch engaged in a
vast array of styles and subject matter, a feat which makes her art
difficult to categorize in art historical terms: anarchic Dada
constructions (1918-1922), psychological portraits and investigations of
gender relations of the 1920s, ethnographic montages from the late 1920s
and 1930s, anti-Nazi parodies from the early 1930s, surrealist fantasies
during and after the Third Reich, abstraction during the 1940s and 1950s,
and a return to the female image during the 1960s. Much of Hchs later
work shares affinities with that of surrealist artists Hans Arp and Max
Ernst.

During the Third Reich, Hch remained in Germany, despite the fact that she
was classified as a cultural Bolshevik. By the late 1930s, she was forced
to withdraw into artistic and social isolation, which culminated in her
moving out of her Berlin studio (with her then husband, Heinz-Kurt
Matthies) to a small house in Heiligensee, a northwestern suburb of the
city. During the war years, Hch continued to create surrealistic
watercolors and oil paintings and spent a lot of time collecting
photographic cutouts for her photomontage file. Her works were neither
exhibited nor purchased, and she maintained little contact with friends and
colleagues, most of whom had gone into exile.

Personal Life
Hchs seven-year relationship with Raoul Hausmann was tumultuous and
painful. Throughout their time together, Hausmann was married to Elfriede
Schaeffer, with whom he had a daughter. Hch wanted children and became
pregnant twice during the relationship, but aborted both pregnancies
because Hausmann was not willing to leave his wife. As the only woman in
the masculinist Dada group, Hch also endured, despite her artistic
successes, perpetual marginalization and devaluation as an artist. In 1926,
on a visit to the Netherlands, Hch met the Dutch poet Til Brugman, with
whom she began a lesbian relationship that would last nine years. She lived
and worked in Holland with Brugman from 1926 until 1929, when the couple
moved back to Berlin. Brugman and Hch remained together until 1935, when
Hch began a relationship with Heinz-Kurt Matthies, a well to do
businessman 21 years her junior. The couple married in 1938, but Matthies
left Hch in 1942 for her friend, the Dutch violinist Nell dEbneth. After
Matthiess departure from Heiligensee, Hch became increasingly isolated,
both socially and artistically. She remained at her Heiligensee home after
the end of the war, becoming once again artistically productive and
actively involved with outside cultural events until her death in 1978.

Legacy
Hchs decision to remain in Germany during the Nazi period hindered her
professional career. Between 1933 and 1945, she was unable to exhibit, lost
contact with her colleagues abroad, and sold few works. But already by
December 1945, Hch began to exhibit again, first in the Berlin area, later
in New York, Rome, and Paris. In 1968, Hans Ohff published Hannah Hch, the
most comprehensive biography of the artist to date. In 1976, Hch was given
her largest retrospective with 169 works in all media, organized by the
Muse dArt de Moderne de la ville de Paris and the Berlin Nationalgalerie.
Hch died at the age of 88 on May 31, 1978. Since the 1970s the artists
Weimar photomontages are regularly featured in important exhibitions and
are given notable critical attention, largely by feminist critics and art
historians. Her post-Weimar work, however, receives limited exposure and
almost no critical examination.

Timeline

1899               1914                         1915
1916               1919        1922                   1926
1929

   |             |                               |                   |
       |                              |                      |
          |

Hch born    Moves to Berlin     Meets Hausmann    Work at Ullstein   1st
Dada Exhibition    Breaks with     Meets Brugman      Returns w Brugman
in Gotha        to study art                                   Joins Berlin
Dada                             Hausmann     Moves to the Hague    to
Berlin


1934                        1935                              1938
                 1939                 1942                      1945
                      1950

   |                      |                            |
   |               |                             |
          |

Graves Disease         Meets Matthies            Marries Matthies
Couple moves        Matthies leaves     Hch exhibits          Founding
member of
Thyroid operation    Breaks w Brugman                                    to
Heiligensee      Hch               in Reinickendorf   Professional
Association

         Inner emigration
                of Visual Artists in Berlin

1957                                               1961
                            1976
                         1978

  |                                                        |
                                       |
                                   |
Solo exhibition                                  Retrospective at Galerie
                      Mammoth retrospective
    Dies at age 88
at Galerie Gerd Rosen, Berlin        Nierendorf, Berlin: 7 paintings
       at Modern Art Museum of
26 collages & photomontages       53 photomontages, 33 watercolors
Paris & Berlin National Gallery


References and further reading:

Berlinische Galerie Museum fr Moderne Kunst Photographie und Architektur
im Martin-Gropius Bau. Hannah Hch 1889-1978. Berlin: Argon, 1989

Kaes, Anton, Martin Jay, and Edward Dimendberg, eds. The Weimar Republic
Sourcebook. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.

Lavin, Maud. Cut with the Kitchen Knife: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah
Hch. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1993.

Makela, Maria, Peter Boswell, and Carolyn Lanchner. The Photomontages of
Hannah Hch. Minneapolis: Walker Art Center, 1996.

Maurer, Ellen. Hannah Hch. Grove Art Online. Accessed through St. Louis
County Library on January 17, 2012 at www.oxfordartonline.com.


