
Impressionism in Thailand

Impressionism in Thailand was a modern movement pioneered by Chit Buabus
and Fua Haripitak, young artists from Poh Chang School (The School of Arts
and Crafts), the institution which dominated the Thai art scene from the
post-war period up until at least 1958. Sometimes, the movement is loosely
termed as Thai Impressionism. This style was not entirely different from
French Impressionism, Thai Impressionists shared the swift, broken and bold
brushstrokes, the use of bright and varied colours as well as the attempt
to depict or everyday subjects with their French counterparts. However,
unlike in the French context, the term impressionism in Thailand was read
in a literal way. As Silpa Bhirasri, the founder of Silpakorn art
university, wrote, ...the word Impressionism should not be understood as
merely copying the Western Impressionist School...impressionism means to
express sincerely what we see and, accordingly, what we feel without any
intellectual speculation. Unlike French Impressionism, then, Thai
Impressionism was not regarded as a revolt against the academy. On the
contrary, Thai Impressionist works were welcomed by Thai art academies and
became a kind of institutional art in their own right.

According to Silpa Bhirasri, Impressionism, along with Realism, were two
movements that most Thai artists passed through when beginning of their
career. Impressionism was introduced to Thailand by Thai artists who had
seen Impressionist paintings abroad and then adopted the style when they
returned home. Khun Pathiphakphimlikhit, a tutor at The School of Arts and
Crafts, played a crucial role by encouraging young Thai artists to adopt an
impressionistic style. It is believed that he was the first Thai
Impressionist, however, all of his works were either lost or destroyed. The
earliest example of impressionistic work was Fua Haripitaks portrait of
Silpa Bhirasri (1935). Haripitak, along with Chit Buabus, was one of Khun
Pathiphakphimlikhits most prominent pupils and later became notable
Impressionist artist. When Haripitak  and Buabus were art students at the
School of Arts and Crafts in 1929, they would paint landscapes near
Bangkapi (a district in Bangkok) utilising the same en plein air practice
as the French Impressionists.





[pic]
Misiem Yipintsoi, Dreamers Avenue (1949), The National Gallery, Bangkok.
(Modern Art in Thailand, 1992)

      Thai Impressionist artists focused on depictions of landscapes,
cityscapes, still lives and nude figures. Impressionism was so celebrated
that most of the awards in the National Exhibition of Art were given to the
Impressionist paintings, including Misieum Yipintsoi (1949, 1950 and 1951),
Sawasdi Tantisuk (1953), Chamras Kietkong and Fua Haripitak (1950). Thai
Impressionism was succeeded by Cubism, which was adopted by Thai artists
during the 1940s but was not popular until the mid-1950s.


Reference and further reading

Piriya Krairiksh and Paothong Thongchua. (1982) Silpakam lang por. sor.
2475 [Arts after 1932]. Bangkok: Thammasat University.

Suthee Kunavichayanont. (2002) Chak Siam kao su thai mai: wa duay khwam
plikpun khong silapa chak prapeni su samai mai lae ruam samai (From the Old
Siam to the New Thai: Changes in Thai arts from Traditional to Modern and
Contemporary). Bangkok: Silpakorn University Art Gallery.

Wiboon Lisuwan. (1999). Silpa samai mhai lae silpa ruam samai nai prathet
Thai (Modern Art and Contemporary art in Thailand). Bangkok: Ton Aor.

Wichoke Mukdamanee. (2003) 6 Totsawat silpakam ruam samai nai prathet Thai
(Six decades of the Contemporary art in Thailand). Bangkok: Silpakorn
University Art Gallery.




