Matt Cox

												Abdullah, Basuki (1915-1993)

												

												Basuki Abullah was the son of the painter and illustrator Abdullah Suriosubroto (Mas Abdullah) who taught him and a number of other artists their basic skills. From 1933- 1936 Basuki studied at the Academie voor Beeldende Kunsten in The Hague and then travelled onto Paris before returning to Java. Whilst he only completed three years of the five-year course it immediately led to a portrait commission by Dr. Plesman, the director of K.L.M and launched his career as a portrait painter. Having painted the portraits of Imelda Marcos, President Sukarno and a large number of other royal and political persons Basuki Abdulla should be regarded as Indonesia’s most successful portrait painter. His portraits however are often overshadowed by his landscape paintings which, in conforming to the formulaic composition of the Mooi Indies (Beautiful Indies) landscapes popular among colonial painters, has earned him a reputation as a conservative painter and colonial sympathizer. Such landscapes that are readily identified by their depiction of rice fields, coconut palms, blue skies and the inclusion of volcanic mountains have suffered terribly from their association with colonialism but have recently increased in popularity among Indonesian collectors. This renewed interest stems from the understanding that Basuki’s career, whilst inconsistent with the adversarial posturing of Europe’s avant-garde, embodied a form of modernism reflecting the tension between class and national concerns in a period of dramatic political unrest.

												



References and Further Reading 



Agus, Dermawan T. (1985). R. Basuki Abdullah RA: Duta Seni Lukis Indonesia, PT Gramedia, Jakarta



Sudarmaji (1974). Dari Saleh Sampai Aming. Seni Lukis Indonesia Baru dalam Sejarah dan Apresiasi, Sekolah Tinggi Seni Rupa Indonesia ASRI Yogyakarta, Jogjakarta 

	

Supangkat, J. (1995). The Emergence of Indonesian Modernism and its Background. Asian Modernism Diverse Development in Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand, Tokyo Asia Center, Tokyo



Wright, A. (1994). Soul, Spirit and Mountain: Preoccupations of Contemporary Indonesian Painters, Oxford University Press, Kuala Lumpur