

Intonarumori (noise intoners) are musical instruments designed by the Italian Futurist painter-turned-musician Luigi Russolo (1885-1947) who, in 1914, proposed an ‘art of noises’ that took inspiration from the modern city, the natural world, and modern warfare. Russolo’s noise instruments consisted of plywood boxes containing motorized mechanics that activated a stretched diaphragm, which made sounds through a horn that an operator (musician) could manipulate in terms of pitch by pulling on a lever. Russolo’s orchestra of intonarumori included such instruments as the exploder, crackler, buzzer, stamper, gurgler, screamer, rustler, whistler, thunderer, and the croaker. Pieces composed for the intonarumori include Russolo’s Risveglio di una città [Awakening of a City] (1913-1914) and Convegno di automobili e di aeroplani [A Meeting of Motorcars and Aeroplanes] (1913-1914). Noise music was played at Futurist performance events and concerts in Europe sporadically from 1913-1927 and achieved notoriety. The original instruments were destroyed in Milan in the Second World War. The sole recordings of compositions that feature them are of poor quality and may misrepresent or only partially convey their original sound. Luciano Chessa has pioneered the reconstruction of the intonarumori, which, he argues, Russolo conceived as occult instruments, portals to another world.

Intonarumori (noise intoners) are musical instruments designed by the Italian Futurist painter-turned-musician Luigi Russolo (1885-1947) who, in 1914, proposed an ‘art of noises’ that took inspiration from the modern city, the natural world, and modern warfare. Russolo’s noise instruments consisted of plywood boxes containing motorized mechanics that activated a stretched diaphragm, which made sounds through a horn that an operator (musician) could manipulate in terms of pitch by pulling on a lever. Russolo’s orchestra of intonarumori included such instruments as the exploder, crackler, buzzer, stamper, gurgler, screamer, rustler, whistler, thunderer, and the croaker. Pieces composed for the intonarumori include Russolo’s Risveglio di una città [Awakening of a City] (1913-1914) and Convegno di automobili e di aeroplani [A Meeting of Motorcars and Aeroplanes] (1913-1914). Noise music was played at Futurist performance events and concerts in Europe sporadically from 1913-1927 and achieved notoriety. The original instruments were destroyed in Milan in the Second World War. The sole recordings of compositions that feature them are of poor quality and may misrepresent or only partially convey their original sound. Luciano Chessa has pioneered the reconstruction of the intonarumori, which, he argues, Russolo conceived as occult instruments, portals to another world.



Additional Resources

1. Historical recordings of music featuring intonarumori: http://www.ubu.com/sound/russolo_l.html

Further reading:

 (Brown)



(Chessa)



(Russolo)