

Alexander Archipenko studied painting and sculpture at the Kyiv Art school from 1902 until 1905, when he was expelled for criticizing its conservatism. Outside formal schooling, he was interested in ancient art indigenous to Ukraine – stone sculptures of females known as ‘babas’, Scythian works, as well as those from Neolithic Trypillian culture being excavated in the region at the time. These would inform his work throughout his career, as would ancient Egyptian, pre-Columbian and Byzantine art. His polychromed sculpture, was exhibited in his first show in 1906, in a village outside Kyiv. He moved to Moscow that same year, participated in group exhibitions, and saw French avant-garde art first-hand, particularly, the first ‘Zolotoe runo’ Salon in spring 1908. Later that year, he moved to Paris, and after two weeks at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, decided to study independently, from direct observation of art works at local museums. Archipenko opened a studio and built relationships with many artists of the cubist circle, particularly brothers Marcel Duchamp and Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Fernand Léger. He first exhibited with them in 1910 at the Salon des Independents XXVI, joining them regularly until their last group show in 1920.

Alexander Archipenko studied painting and sculpture at the Kyiv Art school from 1902 until 1905, when he was expelled for criticizing its conservatism. Outside formal schooling, he was interested in ancient art indigenous to Ukraine – stone sculptures of females known as ‘babas’, Scythian works, as well as those from Neolithic Trypillian culture being excavated in the region at the time. These would inform his work throughout his career, as would ancient Egyptian, pre-Columbian and Byzantine art. His polychromed sculpture, was exhibited in his first show in 1906, in a village outside Kyiv. He moved to Moscow that same year, participated in group exhibitions, and saw French avant-garde art first-hand, particularly, the first ‘Zolotoe runo’ Salon in spring 1908. Later that year, he moved to Paris, and after two weeks at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, decided to study independently, from direct observation of art works at local museums. Archipenko opened a studio and built relationships with many artists of the cubist circle, particularly brothers Marcel Duchamp and Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Fernand Léger. He first exhibited with them in 1910 at the Salon des Independents XXVI, joining them regularly until their last group show in 1920. Beginning in 1914, Archipenko produced his sculpto-paintings – constructed, brightly painted wall ‘reliefs’, inspired in part by collage’s assemblage of various textured elements. He created near 40, primarily focusing on women in interiors, until 1923, only to resume them in the 1950s.



Archipenko was the son of Paraskeva Vasylivna [nee Makhova] and Porfirii Antonovych Archipenko. His father was a professor of engineering at the University of Kyiv, an inventor and mechanical engineer.  The years from 1908 until the early 1920s were an extremely innovative period in Archipenko’s artistic production.  He exhibited works at the Armory Show in New York in 1913, with the Futurists in 1914 and solo, at Der Sturm in Berlin 1913, at the Venice Biennale in 1920 and at Société Anonyme, New York in 1921. A number of his early works with the human figure are block-like and self-contained, explorations of mass and shape in varying degrees of angularity. Voids of space, concave and convex forms were increasingly included as defining sculptural elements, [eg. Woman Combing Her Hair, 1914] and are informed by dance, movement, and the dynamics of opposing forces, an interest of many artists at the time. 



In 1920, Archipenko moved to Berlin and opened a school, still maintaining his Paris studio. There he married the sculptor Angelica Bruno-Schmitz, who worked under the name Gela Forster. She was a founding member of the Dresdner Sezession Gruppe 1919, and a significant artist of German Expressionism. In 1921, Archipenko returned to more naturalistic representations, such as Feminine Solitude, 1921. He and Schmitz emigrated to the U.S. in 1923, settling in New York. In 1927, he received a patent for his invention Archipentura, a machine designed to produce ‘true motion’ in painting. Now lost, it consisted of two 3 x 7’ boxes, into which horizontal strips of canvas were sequentially mounted to make up an entire image. When activated, a mechanism moved the strips, changing the image. He continued to exhibit across the U.S. and was given a solo exhibition at the Ukrainian Pavilion of the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition in 1933. He taught in Los Angeles, then in Chicago at the New Bauhaus upon the invitation of László Moholy-Nagy, it’s director, before returning to New York, where he began producing sculptures made of plexiglass. During the 1950s, his works were featured in a number of major exhibitions on 20th century modern art, such as ‘L’Oeuvre du XXe, Peintures, Sculptures’ [Musée National d”Art Moderne, Paris, Tate Gallery as XXth Century Masterpieces]; ‘American Sculpture’ [Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1951]; ‘Sculpture of the Twentieth Century’ [Philadelphia Museum of Art, Art Institute of Chicago, Museum of Modern Art, NY, 1952] and received national honors for his innovations in sculpture.



Image: Archipenko,Alexander_Médranoll.jpg

Figure 1 Médrano II (1913-14). 'Sculpto-painting,' painted tin, wood, glass, and painted oilcloth.

Copyright info: Médrano II, 1913–14. ‘Sculpto-painting’, Painted tin, wood, glass, and painted 

oilcloth, 49 7/8 × 20 1/4 × 12 1/2 inches (126.6 × 51.5 × 31.7 cm). Solomon R. 

Guggenheim Museum, New York, 56.1445. © 2013 Estate of Alexander Archipenko/

Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York.

Further reading:



 (Leshko)



(Michaelsen and Guralnik)



(Vita)