
Jolas, Eugene (1894-1952)

Eugene Jolas was a journalist, editor, translator, and poet who embodied
the transatlantic character of modernism between the World Wars. Born in
New Jersey but raised in the borderland of Alsace-Lorraine by his French
father and German mother, and moving frequently between Europe and America
from 1909 until he settled in Paris in the 1920s, Jolas was a translator in
every sense of the word. The task of transition, the Paris-based literary
journal he edited with his wife Maria Jolas and others between 1927 and
1938, was to translate European culture for Americans, and vice-versa.
(Bridge and Continents were among the other names he considered for the
magazine.) transitions list of contributors reads like a whos who of the
international avant-garde. Jolas wealth of contacts in the literary world
grew out of his previous job writing the column Rambles Through Literary
Paris for the Chicago Tribune Paris edition. The romantic, imagination-
driven strain of modernism that Jolas promoted led to a close relationship
with Expressionism and Surrealism. Publishing non-Anglophone experimental
writing in translation or (after 1933) in the original language was a major
focus of transition. Jolas also provided English translations of key
European modernist texts outside the magazine, including Alfred Dblins
Berlin Alexanderplatz (1931).
      Throughout the 1930s, Jolas promoted the search for a new literary
language. His numerous books of poetry, including The Language of Night
(1932), Angels and Demons (1937), and Vertical (1938), reflect this search
for new modes of expression. In transition, this concern was summed up in
the Revolution of the Word manifesto of 1929. James Joyces Finnegans
Wake (1939), serialized for more than a decade in the magazine as Work in
Progress, also set the tone for linguistic experimentation. The Jolases
were close friends and supporters of Joyce, contributing to the genesis of
Finnegans Wake and later helping the author and his family escape from
Paris to Switzerland in 1940. Following his death in 1941, Maria Jolas even
acted for a time as Joyces executor. During the Second World War, Jolas
served in the Psychological Warfare Division, and in the postwar period he
led efforts to reestablish a free press in Germany. The Eugene and Maria
Jolas Papers are held in the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library of
Yale University.
      Link: http://bit.ly/L7luqN

References and Further Reading

Jolas, E. (1998) Man from Babel, ed. Andreas Kramer and Rainer Rumold, New
Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Jolas, E. (2009) Eugene Jolas: Critical Writings, 1924-1951, ed. Klaus
Kiefer and Rainer Rumold, Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
McMillan, D. (1975) Transition 1927-38: The History of a Literary Era,
London: Calder Press.
Perloff, M. (1998) Logocinma of the Frontiersman: Eugene Jolass
Multilingual Poetics and its Legacies
(http://wings.buffalo.edu/epc/authors/perloff/jolas.html)

- Julian Hanna
