Holiday Powers



297 words

Kacimi, Mohamed (1942-2003 Meknès, Morocco)



Mohamed Kacimi was an important Moroccan modernist artist who rose to prominence in the 1970s. His paintings were semi-abstract. Although a large part of his canvases were often entirely abstracted washes of color, recognisably human figures took on increasing importance during his career.  These human figures, created with an economy of lines and lacking individual differentiation, were often included within these abstract compositions. As well as his painting, Kacimi was known as a writer of both essays and poetry. He began writing in 1972 for varied journals and papers in Morocco and throughout the Arab world. With the Moroccan writers’ union and arts association, Kacimi played a role in founding the journal Alischara (Signs).  Kacimi exhibited in a number of significant exhibitions, including the first Arab biennale in Baghdad (1974), and his work is held in numerous collections, including the Khalid Shoman Foundation/Darat al Funun (Amman). He also provided illustrations for numerous books in collaboration with writers such as Abdellatif Laabi. After his death, the Moroccan Ministry of Culture opened the Galerie Mohamed el Kacimi in 2005 in Fes, in homage to the significance of Kacimi’s artistic contribution.



References and further reading: 

Devalière, F. (2007) Mohamed Kacimi: inventer la liberté: 1942-2003, Rabat: Ed. Marsam. (This short monograph is part of a series of monographs on Moroccan artists for the Collection Regards Obliques, and includes biographical information and images.)



Institut du Monde Arabe. (1991) Peintres du Maroc: Belkahia, Bellamine, Cherkaoui, Kacimi, Paris: L’Institut du Monde Arabe. (This catalog features essays on each of the artists included, as well as exhibition histories.)



Pontcharra, N., Gaudibert, P., Maraini, T. (1985) 19 peintres du Maroc, Grenoble: Centre national d’art contemporain. (This is the catalog of an exhibition that includes information and short essays on a number of Moroccan artists, including Kacimi.)